Third International Conference in Contrastive Semantics &amp; PragmaticsShanghai International Studies UniversityShanghaiConditionals in English and FOPL
Barbara Abbott
Michigan State University
abbottb@msu.eduIf andsuppose – two small words, but
nobody has ever been able to explain them.
  – Jack Johnson
In the 1960’s, both Montague (e.g. 1970, 222) and Grice (1975, 24) famously declaredthat natural languages were not so different from the formal languages of logic as peoplehad thought.  Montague sought to comprehend the grammars of both within a singletheory, and Grice sought to explain away apparent divergences as due to the fact that theformer, but not the latter, were used for conversation.  But, if we confine our concept oflogic to first order predicate logic (or FOPL) with identity (that is, omitting everythingwhich is not required for the pursuit of mathematical truth), then there are of course manyother aspects, in addition to its use in conversation, which distinguish natural languagefrom logic.  Conventional implicature, information structure (including presupposition),tense and time reference, and the expression of causation and inference are several ofthese, which combine as well with syntactic complexities which are unnecessary in firstorder predicate logic.  In this paper I will argue that such distinguishing aspects should bemore fully exploited to explain the differences between the material conditional of logicand the indicative conditional of one natural language (English).
In the first section of the paper we will review the main contending analyses of the
English indicative conditional.  In section 2 I will try to argue there that, as far as truthconditions go, there is some support for the much maligned material conditional view.(Much of this material is taken from Abbott 2004.)  Following that we will look in moredetail at some of the traditionally cited problems for the material conditional analysis.Here I will try to draw on the differences between natural language and logic mentionedabove in order to argue that these problems are not as crushing as they are sometimestaken to be.  The last section of the paper contains concluding remarks.11 There are a number of kinds ofif sentences whose semantics and pragmatics will not be addressed in thispaper.  Subjunctive conditionals will be touched on only briefly, to be distinguished from ordinaryindicative conditionals.  I will have even less, if anything, to say about ‘generic’ conditionals, e.g.(i)
If a student wants to succeed, s/he should study hard.
orif-clauses which serve as quantificational restrictors, e.g.(ii)
Often if it is raining my roof leaks [= Lewis1975, ex. 32].
See von Fintel &amp; Iatridou 2002 for discussion of the former, and Lewis 1975 for discussion of the latter.
11.  Competing analyses of English indicative conditional sentences.1.1.  The material conditional analysis.  According to the material conditional analysis,indicative conditionals have the truth conditions of the material conditional truth functionof logic, hereinafter sometimes symbolized with the ‘hook’ (⊃).  These are given in (1)below.(1)ACA ⊃C
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
Thus on this account, indicative English sentences of the formIf A (then) C are trueunlessA is true andC is false, and they are equivalent toEither not-A or C.  A number offactors support this analysis.  For one thing, it would give ⊃ a corresponding naturallanguage expression (to go withand (for ∧)or (for ∨), andnot (for ¬)).  Moreimportantly,if A then C often does seem to be equivalent toEither not-A or C.  AsStalnaker notes: ‘“Either the butler or the gardener did it.  Therefore, if the butler didn’tdo it, the gardener did.”  This piece of reasoning…may seem tedious, but it is surelycompelling’  (1975, 137).  And if it is valid then the English indicative conditional is infact equivalent to the material conditional of FOPL.  (Stalnaker did not come to thisconclusion; however Hanson 1991 and Barker 1997 also give proof-like arguments infavor of the material conditional analysis.)
The problems for this analysis are well-known.  For the most part they stem from
the failure of those truth conditions by themselves to predict either assertability ofindicative conditionals or their use in reasoning, in a number of cases.  Some of thesecases, so-called ‘fallacies of the material conditional’, are given in (2)-(4).  In each case Igive first a logically valid deduction, and then an English example which does not seemto be valid.  (These examples are modified from ones found frequently in the literature;(2) is based on an example from Jackson (1979), (3) is based on examples from Gibbard(1980), and (4) comes from Goodman (1947).)(2) Contraposition.
a.
A ⊃ C,  ∴ ¬C ⊃ ¬A
b.
If Bush wins, it won’t be by a large margin.  Therefore, if Bush wins by alarge margin, he won’t win.
(3) Negated Antecedent (a.k.a. Vacuous Truth).
a.
¬A, ∴ A ⊃ C
b.
Andrew Jackson was President in 1836.  Therefore, if Jackson died in 1835,he was president in 1836.
(4) Antecedent Strengthening.
a.
A ⊃ C,  ∴ (A ∧ B) ⊃ C
b.
If I strike this match it will light.  Therefore, if I pour water on this matchand strike it, it will light.
The other major problem area for the material conditional analysis is the fact that denyingIf A then C rarely seems equivalent to assertingA and not-C, as it should on the materialconditional analysis.  Indeed, if we accept this analysis we seem forced to accept the
2existence of God, given proofs like the following (from Michael Jubien, personalcommunication; a similar proof was attributed to W.D. Hart by Edgington (1986, 37, n.6)).(5) i.
If God doesn’t exist, then it’s not the case that if I’m evil, I’ll be punishedafter I die.
ii.         I’m not evil!
∴
God exists.
(Fortunately for the atheistically inclined, with a little ingenuity we can probably alsocome up with a proof that God doesn’t exist.)1.2.  Intensional analyses.  The vulnerable part of the material conditional analysis is thebottom half of the truth table given in (1), and the remaining analyses find a way to avoidthat area altogether.  Many of them acknowledge a foundation in what has come to becalled ‘the Ramsey test’:(6)
If two people are arguing ‘Ifp, willq?’ and both are in doubt as top, theyare addingp hypothetically to their stock of knowledge and arguing on thatbasis aboutq….  We can say they are fixing their degrees of belief inqgivenp.  (Ramsey 1931, 247; cited in Gibbard 1980, 227.)
The idea behind Stalnaker’s intensional analysis is the following: ‘a conditionalstatement,if A, then B, is an assertion that the consequent is true, not necessarily in theworld as it is, but in the world as it would be if the antecedent were true’ (1975, 143).‘The world as it would be’ is that world which is closest in similarity to the actual worldbut in which the antecedent is true.  (The approaches of Kratzer (1986) and Lycan (2001)are similar, except that the consequent must be true inall worlds (within the context set,or within some subset thereof) in which the antecedent is true.)  This raises the questionof what the difference is between indicative conditionals (like those in (7)) and thecorresponding subjunctive conditionals in (8).(7) a.
If Lynn was there she got the message.
b.
If it rains tomorrow, we can’t have our picnic.
(8) a.
If Lynn had been there, she would have got the message.
b.
If it were to rain tomorrow, we couldn’t have our picnic.
Indeed, both Stalnaker (1968) and Lewis (1973) assign truth conditions to subjunctiveconditionals2 which are very like the Stalnaker truth conditions for indicatives.  Thedifference, for Stalnaker, is whether or not, in going to nearby possible worlds, weabandon propositions which are in the common ground of the conversation.  Forindicatives we don’t, for subjunctives we may.
On this kind of theory, the patterns of inference illustrated in (2)-(4) are not valid,
matching our intuitions about them.  Furthermore the negation of a conditionalIf A thenC is equivalent toIf A then not-C.  This also seems to accord well with our intuitions, atleast in some cases.
Problems have been noted for intentional analyses.  As Edgington points out (2003,
and elsewhere), the kind of inference mentioned above about the butler and the gardener,which was described as ‘compelling’ by Stalnaker, does not hold on this account.  Theexamples are repeated here as (9).2 Actually Lewis 1973 is specifically concerned with the truth conditions for counterfactual conditionals,that subset of subjunctive conditionals for which the antecedent is assumed to be false.
3(9) a.
Either the butler or the gardener did it.
b.
If the butler didn’t do it, the gardener did.
On the possible worlds analysis (9a) could be true while (9b) is false.  This would be thecase if the butler did it, but in the closest world in which he didn’t, the gardener didn’t doit either.  (Stalnaker gives an extended account of why this inference should be reliable,even if not valid (Stalnaker 1975, 187ff).  However the complexity of reasoning involvedmakes it unconvincing.)  I believe there are even worse problems than this for theintensional account, but will postpone going into those until we look at the third sort ofapproach to conditionals.1.3  Probabilistic analyses.  The Ramsey test also naturally gives rise to a probabilisticapproach to conditionals.  This approach focuses on the assertability of a conditional,which requires that the probability of the consequent given the antecedent (P(C/A)) isrelatively high (and thus the probability of the negation of the consequent (P (¬C/A))relatively low).  Adams 1975 is thelocus classicus of this kind of approach, which  hasbeen more recently supported and developed by Stefan Kaufmann (2001, 2005).Interestingly, Lewis (1976, 1986) proved that there is no proposition X (i.e. no set oftruth conditions) such that for a single probability measure, the probability of X is equalto a conditional probability.  This means that acceptance of the probabilistic approach hasthe consequence that conditionals can not be viewed as having truth conditions at all.Supporters of this approach speak instead simply of the assertability of a conditionalsentence, or the degree to which it is supported, or its probability, but this cannot be itsprobability of truth.
On the account of Kaufmann (2005), which treats only subjunctive and future
(predictive) conditionals, such conditionals can be true – they will be if their antecedentsare true and their consequents are as well.  And they are false if their antecedents are trueand their consequents are false.  However if their antecedents are false, they are assigned‘expectations’ – something like a probability of truth, were the antecedent to have beentrue.  This is quite similar to the intensional type of approach, but instead of simplyquantifying over possible worlds Kaufmann’s probabilistic approach evaluates anindicative conditionalIf A then C by comparing the proportion of worlds whereA andCare both true to those whereA is true andC is false.  (In addition, Kaufmann imposes acausal structure on the worlds under consideration, in order to avoid certain difficultieswith prior accounts of this type, and there are other complexities which I am skippingover.)2.  Objections to the intensional and probabilistic analyses.
My main objection to both the intensional type of approach to conditionals, and toKaufmann’s probabilistic type of approach, is that they do not adequately distinguishindicative conditionals from subjunctive conditionals.2.1.  The ‘Snodgrass’ example.3  In Abbott (2004) I presented the following ‘Snodgrass’example: We have received a number of letters about the water shortage.  Almost all ofthem were 5 pages or less, and all of those received an answer.  One letter (from Byram3 My ‘Snodgrass’ example is similar to the type of situation described in Barker 1997.
4Snodgrass) was 5 pages plus a few words, and the last letter was 8 pages.  We did notreply to the last two letters.  The 8-page one was just too long to consider, and ByramSnodgrass is a crank who has been writing incoherent letters to us about everything underthe sun ever since we took on the post of Water Commissioner.  We never answer hisletters.  Actually this letter of Byram's only went onto the sixth page because he added aPS: ‘If you answer this letter I'll stop writing to you.’  That made us stop and think, but inthe end we threw his letter in the trash like all his other letters.
Byram called our office to find out whether his letter had been sent a reply.  Based
on the truth in (10),(10)
Every letter no longer than 5 pages was answered.
we said (11):(11)
If your letter was no longer than 5 pages, it was answered.Our reply was truthful.
There is a sharp contrast between the true indicative conditional in (11) and the
corresponding subjunctive conditional in (12), which is not true:(12)
If your letter had been no longer than 5 pages, it would have been answered.
As noted, we never answer letters from Byram Snodgrass.  Analyses of subjunctiveconditionals like that of Stalnaker 1968 and Lewis 1973 seem to give the right truthconditions for (12).  In those analyses, we look at the closest world or worlds where theantecedent of a subjunctive conditional is true, and see whether the consequent is true ornot.  In any of those nearby possible worlds where Byram’s letter was not quite 5 pageslong, it still did not receive an answer, so the subjunctive (12) is correctly classified asfalse.
Analyses of indicative conditionals which assign them truth conditions similar to
those assigned to subjunctive conditionals, and so only consider situations in which theantecedent is true even if this involves considering nonactual possibilities, cannotdistinguish between (11) and (12) and hence cannot be correct.The problem with suchanalyses is that they do not capture the fact stated in (F)(F)Indicative conditionals are always about the actual world, whether theirantecedents are true or false.Subjunctive conditionals, on the other hand, involve consideration of hypotheticalsituations, which may or may not be actual.2.2.  Snodgrass vs. Oswald.  I should take a moment to explain why my ‘Snodgrass’examples are different from the well-known ‘Oswald’ examples in (13) and (14)(adapted by Lewis (1973, 3) from examples given by Adams (1970, 90)), which arefrequently given to illustrate the difference between indicative conditionals andsubjunctive conditionals.(13)
If Oswald did not kill Kennedy, then someone else did.
(14)
If Oswald had not killed Kennedy, then someone else would have.
It is quite easy to see that one could hold (13) to be true and (14) to be false.Nevertheless these examples do not make the case I wanted to make.  Several factorscombine to make them unsuitable.  One is that there are two different ways to conceive ofthe antecedent being true, that is, to conceive of it being the case that Oswald did not killKennedy.  One is to imagine that the crime was committed, but that Oswald did not do it.The other is to imagine that the crime never took place.  When we are considering (13),
5we are considering the first sort of situation and when we consider (14) we areconsidering the second.  Also, when we consider (13) we consider the actual world (Iwould say we are forced to consider only the actual world, because this is an indicativeconditional), and we can do that because there must always be some small doubt aboutwhether Oswald was the murderer (and for some people, of course, there is a lot ofdoubt).  However there can be no doubt that the crime was committed, so for (14) weconsider a quite different possible world in which the crime never took place.
In short, for the Oswald examples there are two different ways to imagine the
antecedent being true, one of which could hold in the actual world, and the other of whichcould not.  So analyses like those of Stalnaker, Lycan, and Kratzer can account for thedifference between them while still only considering situations in which the antecedent istrue – an actual situation for (13) and a hypothetical, nonactual one for (14).  For theSnodgrass examples, on the other hand, the antecedent is not ambivalent in this way.Instead, the antecedent of the indicative conditional is false at the actual world, but westill judge the whole conditional to be true.  For the subjunctive version, on the otherhand, we must consider alternative possible worlds in which the antecedent is true, andthere the sentence as a whole is false because the consequent is false.2.3.  Future situations.  As noted above, Kaufmann’s probabilistic account does not treatpast indicative conditionals, but only future and subjunctive ones.  Indeed, it has oftenbeen suggested (most notably by Dudman (1991 and elsewhere)) that future conditionalsbear more similarity to subjunctive conditionals than they do to other indicatives.  I donot agree.  Instead, I want to claim that future indicative conditionals no less than past orpresent ones are about the actual world and not alternative possibilities, and that in thatthey differ from subjunctives.
Let us return to our situation with Mr. Snodgrass.  Suppose he were to call prior to
writing his letter, to ask about whether or not his letter to the water commissioner wouldbe answered.  Suppose too that we know who he is and his history with the WaterCommission, but we do not know how long the letter he will write is.  Presumably, if wewanted to be truthful, we would not reply with (15), or (16).(15)
Every letter that is no more than 5 pages long will be answered.
(16)
If your letter is at most 5 pages, it will be answered.
That is because we know that if Snodgrass’s letter turned out to be shorter than 5 pagesthere is still no way it would get an answer.  And clearly if Snodgrass were to learn aboutthe customary (for everybody but him) 5 page limit and make sure to write a letter shorterthan 5 pages, (15) and (16) would be false if we didn’t answer it.  But I want to claim that(15) is true if and only if every letter shorter than 5 pages gets an answer.  And ifSnodgrass’s letter turns out to be longer than 5 pages (and all the short letters getanswers), the predictive (16) is true, regardless of what would have happened had hisletter been shorter than that.  And so if we had answered with (15) or (16), intending tolie, we would have failed under those circumstances, since we would have saidsomething true.
What gives these future cases the subjunctive feel to them is probably the fact that
they are about as yet undetermined (or at least unknowable) events, and so in that sensethey represent hypotheses about what will be the case.  But regardless of that, it would bea mistake to give their truth conditions on the basis of how well- or ill-founded they are
6as hypotheses, just as we would not want to evaluate future non-conditionals, like thosein (17), on that basis.(17) a.
It will rain tomorrow.
b.
The Bush administration will recognize the full threat of global warming
and
act vigorously to avert it.
Certainly we may argue about the truth or falsity of examples like (17) based on our viewof their probability, but just as certainly we cannot be sure of their truth or falsity untilafter their respective event times have passed.  Similarly examples like (15) and (16)should not be evaluated on the basis of probabilities, but rather than on the basis of howthe facts unfold, since when we are in full knowledge of how the facts do unfold, weclearly evaluate them relative to those facts and not to some alternative possible course ofevents.  This claim is pretty directly opposed to the following assertion of Kaufmann(2005, 186): ‘It is appropriate to say that [18] is true or false depending on whether thematch is dry or wet….’(18)
If the match is struck, it will light.  [= Kaufmann 2005, ex. 7a]
On the contrary, we cannot say whether (18) is true or false until either the match isstruck or it can no longer be struck.2.4.  Conclusion.  My main claim in the foregoing has been that indicative conditionalsare about the actual world, rather than about alternative possible worlds.  This claim issupported by the morphological evidence; indicative conditionals are indicative – there isno morphological marking of irrealis like that we find with, say, subjunctive conditionals.There has been a fair amount of discussion in the literature as to how similar or differentindicative conditionals are from subjunctives.  The comments of Strawson (1986) arefrequently cited, as in the following quote from Edgington (1995, 245) (cf. alsoKaufmann 2005, 184f):
He [i.e. Strawson] gives the examples;
Remark made in the summer of 1964: ‘If Goldwater is elected, then theliberals will be dismayed’.Remark made in the winter of 1964: ‘If Goldwater had been elected,then the liberals would have been dismayed’’
And comments that ‘the least attractive thing that one could say about thedifference between these two remarks is that… “if…then…” has a differentmeaning in one remark from the meaning which it has in the other’ (p. 230).
However it is not necessary to invoke a difference in the meaning ofif…then… in orderto claim a difference between indicative and subjunctive conditionals, since there isanother factor which distinguishes them – their mood.  Furthermore the differencebetween indicative and subjunctive mood corresponds exactly to the distinction I claimexists between indicative and subjunctive conditionals – i.e. that indicatives are about theactual world whereas subjunctives are about hypothetical possibilities.  (Cf. also Iatridou2000.)3.  Support for the material conditional.
73.1.  A conventional implicature for if.  Since the material conditional analysis ofindicatives is the only extant proposal which treats them as being unambiguously aboutthe actual world, it seems worthwhile to keep looking for ways to deal with theapparently crushing problems for this analysis.  Edgington (1995, 245) summarizes theproblem as follows: ‘We need to be able to discriminate believable from unbelievableconditionals whose antecedent we think is false. The truth-functional account does notallow us to do this.’Grice, of course, has been one of the most vigorous defenders of the truth functionalanalysis, supplementing it with the idea that assertion of a conditional conveysconversationally that the speaker has grounds independent of either falsity of theantecedent or truth of the consequent for believing that the conditional is true.  (Cf. Grice1989a; these grounds would typically be some causal or inferential relation between thetwo propositions.)  However Edgington argues that this will not do: ‘…the difficultieswith the truth-functional conditional cannot be explained away in terms of what is aninappropriate conversational remark.  They arise at the level of belief’ (1995, 245).
Jackson (1979) also argues against Grice’s version of the material conditional
analysis.  Instead, he proposes that conditionals convey aconventional implicature (inthe sense of Grice 1975) to the effect that the conditional is ROBUST with respect to thetruth of the antecedent.  This enables him to distinguish plausible from implausibleconditionals with false antecedents.  Failure of this robustness (e.g. in the case of the badconditionals in (2)-(4) above) leads to unassertability of a conditional, though notnecessarily to its falsehood.  Since Jackson’s implicature is conventional, it would also bea part of conditional beliefs, thus skirting Edgington’s objections to Grice.  Neverthelessthere are some problems with Jackson’s theory.  One is that it does not allow for ‘Easterbunny’ conditionals such as (19).(19)
If that’s a real diamond then I’m the Easter bunny.
Easter bunny conditionals depend crucially on modus tollens; the consequent is intendedto strike the addressee as obviously false, thus conveying the falsity of the antecedent.Jackson does acknowledge the existence of such conditionals, but argues that they are‘not standard’, and thus that his theory does not need to account for them.  This responseis weak, though it might slip by if there were no other problem with Jackson’s proposal.However there is at least one other problem: Jackson’s proposed conventionalimplicature is unlike other such implicatures in not being available to intuition.  In thecase ofeven ortherefore we know the meanings of the words and know what theconventional implicatures are.  This is not so in the case ofif.  (These problems werepointed out in Abbott 2004; see also Edgington 1995, 301ff4 for further argumentsagainst Jackson’s analysis.)
I would like to amend Jackson’s proposal in the following way.  First of all, like
Jackson, I believe thatif does convey a conventional implicature, but I suggest that theimplicature is something that I will call CONDITIONALITY, by which I mean that theifclause conveys a condition under which the content of the consequent holds.  This issomething that we have direct intuitive access to in connection withif, thus solving thesecond problem associated with Jackson’s proposal.  Also, it does not impede modustollens, thus solving the problem with Easter bunny conditionals.
Secondly, I want to claim that the conditionality conventionally associated withif
gives rise to a number of conversational implicatures.  These are the ones proposed by
8Grice (1989a) to do with there being some grounds independent of truth values forsupposing that the conditional is true – grounds such as that the circumstances referred toin the antecedent are causally sufficient for those in the consequent, or that theconsequent would be inferable from the antecedent for some other reason.
One conversational implicature which is less obvious is what von Fintel &amp; Iatridou
(2002) call ‘iffiness’ – the idea that the proposition expressed by theif clause may not betrue.  The mechanism for this implicature is the standard Gricean one: if one could simplyassert the consequent clause, one would.  By making that assertion conditional on theifclause, one conveys that one is not in a position to make that assertiontout court.  Itfollows (again, from the conditionality) that the antecedent clause is also not one knownby the speaker to be true (because if the speaker did know it was true, then they wouldalso be sure of the truth of the consequent clause).  Notably, this implicature is cancelablein the case of ‘premise-conditionals’ (the term is Haegeman’s (2003)) such as (20)(20)
If [as you say] it is going to rain this afternoon, why don’t we just stay athome and watch a video?  [= Haegeman 2003, ex. 1b]
Here information from context shows the antecedent clause is being assumed to be true,canceling the implicature that it may not be.
Finally, I would like to supplement the Jacksonian approach by observing the many
other features of the English indicative conditional which are not shared with their logicalcounterpart.  (Some of these are also stressed in Lycan, 2001.)  First of all, the semanticasymmetricality of the material conditional is more than matched in English withgrammatical asymmetry:if-clauses are adverbial modifiers of their consequents, notcoordinated clauses (and in this they are conjunction and disjunction).  Like otheradverbial modifiers, their syntactic position shows a lot of flexibility, as shown in (21)and (22).(21) a.
If Sue raises, Bill will call.
b.
Bill will call, if Sue raises.
c.
Bill, if Sue raises, will call.
d.
Bill will, if Sue raises, call.
(22) a.
Fortunately, Bill will call.
b.
Bill will call, fortunately.
c.
Bill, fortunately, will call.
d.
Bill will, fortunately, call.
Often, adverbial modifiers will constitute the main assertion in an utterance, theremainder being grammatically presupposed.  This is true of the temporal and manneradverbials in (23), for example.(23) a.
Mary sliced/didn’t slice the carrots carefully.
b.
Did you visit your mother on Tuesday?
However, because of the conditional meaning ofif, this is not so with antecedents ofconditionals.  Rather, in the typical case of temporally located propositions, they expresscircumstances that are prior to, and hence often backgrounded relative to, those of themain clause.  Note that there is a certain tension between the background idea and theconversational implicature of iffiness noted above.  This is part of what makesconditionals so complex and interesting.
93.2.  Explaining the apparently invalid inferences.  With these facts in mind, let us returnto the seemingly invalid inference patterns displayed above in (2)-(4), repeated here as(24)-(26).(24) Contraposition.
a.
A ⊃ C,  ∴ ¬C ⊃ ¬A
b.
If Bush wins, it won’t be by a large margin.  Therefore, if Bush wins by alarge margin, he won’t win.
(25) Negated Antecedent (a.k.a. Vacuous Truth).
a.
¬A, ∴ A ⊃ C
b.
Andrew Jackson was President in 1836.  Therefore, if Jackson died in 1835,he was president in 1836.
(26) Antecedent Strengthening
a.
A ⊃ C,  ∴ (A ∧ B) ⊃ C
b.
If I strike this match it will light.  Therefore, if I pour water on this matchand strike it, it will light.
Note first that from the grammatical considerations just noted, it is not at all surprisingthat Contraposition gives us strange results.  Due to the asymmetricality of the antecedentand consequent clauses, and the fact that the antecedent clause (as the name implies)typically expresses either temporally or logically antecedent conditions, we do not expectto be able to reverse these roles.
Turning now to truth conditions, it follows from the material conditional analysis
that each of theseis a valid inference pattern.  And that is correct – i.e. theseare valid –in the sense that any situation of which the premise would be true is also one of which theconclusion would be true.  Consider (24b), for example.  If the premise (If Bush  wins itwon’t be by a large margin) is true, then either Bush will lose or he will win by a narrowmargin.  But either of those situations would also be one in which the conclusion (If Bushwins by a large margin, he won’t win) is also true.
What gives these arguments their air of invalidity is that the premise in each caseseems more probable than the conclusion.  That in turn is because we are judging theprobability of the conclusion on the basis of the conditional probability of the consequentclause, given the antecedent.  In the case of (24b), for example, the conclusionIf Bushwins by a large margin, he won’t win seems unlikely because, given that Bush has wonby a large margin, the sentencehe won’t win is not only unlikely to be true, it is definitelygoing to be false.  However, on the material conditional account, the correct way toevaluate the probability of the sentence in question is as the probability of theantecedent’s being false (i.e. Bush’s not winning by a large margin) plus the probabilityof the consequent’s being true (i.e., Bush’s not winning at all), and this probability is justthe same as that of the premise of the argument.
This much is well known (at least in the philosophical literature).  However, I want
to draw attention to another factor which may be at work here.  Kaplan (2005) haspointed out that our sense of argument validity depends on more than the simple truthconditions of an utterance.  Kaplan’s examples involve the semantic content of epithetslikedamn andbastard; note that that (27) does not seem like a valid inference (Kaplan2005, 8).(27)
Kaplan was promoted.  Therefore, that damn Kaplan was promoted.
10The problem, as Kaplan describes it, is this: ‘Although nothing issaid in the conclusionthat is not said in the premises, there is an intrusion of informationdisplayed in theconclusion that is not available from the premises’ (10, italics in original).  (The sense ofsaid here seems to be Grice’s (1975) sense – which includes just truth conditions for themain assertion of a sentence.  See Bach 1999 for a different view.)
This idea of Kaplan’s extends naturally to (other?) conventional implicatures like
the one I have proposed forif.  Thus each of the conclusions in (24) – (26) conveysthoughts which would not be inferable from their respective premises, namely, thoseconveyed by the conditionality implicature ofif.  In the case of (24b), the implicature isthat Bush’s winning by a large margin is a condition for his not winning, which isobviously false.  In the case of (25b) the implicature is that Jackson’s death in 1835 is acondition for his being president in 1836, again something that is obviously not the case.And in the case of (26b) the implicature is that pouring water on this match and striking itis a condition for its lighting, which strikes us as at least dubious.  It should be stressed,though, that in each case these propositions are implicatures, and not a part of the mainasserted or ‘at issue’ content of the utterance.3.3. Even if conditionals.I want to take a brief look ateven if conditionals, of which asimple example is given in (28).(28)
Even if it rains tomorrow, the match will still be played.
There have been a number of proposals for suchconditionals (e.g. Bennett 1982, 2003;Barker 1991, 1994; Lycan 1991, 2001); and they all agree that the goal is to give ananalysis ofeven and an analysis ofif that will, when combined, automatically account foreven if.  I believe that that is possible with the approach taken here.Even is, of course, afocus sensitive particle; it adds a conventional implicature to the effect that there areother items besides the one in its focus for which the rest of the sentence holds true, andthat the sentence holding true is in some sense less expected for the focussed item thanfor the others.  When the antecedent of a conditional is under focus byeven, theimplicature is that the consequent is even more likely in other antecedent conditions.
There has been a fair amount of attention paid to what has been called the
‘Consequent Entailment’ problem.  The assumption has been that, for at least someevenif conditionals (like that in (28)), the consequent clause is in fact entailed by theconditional as a whole.  However, as Frank Jackson has argued (Jackson 1979, 125), thisis not actually the case; it is always possible to consistently add another condition underwhich that consequent wouldnot hold, as in (29).(29)
Even if it rains tomorrow, the match will still be played.  However, if itsnows it will definitely be cancelled.
Furthermore this implication of speaker confidence in the consequent (all other thingsbeing equal – i.e., without an added condition as in (29)) is easily accounted for as aconsequence of the meaning ofeven if conditionals.  Given that they require anassumption that the consequent is even more likely in other conditions, they are bound toconvey that the consequent is more likely than would be conveyed by the sameconditional without theeven.
The reason for bringing upeven if conditionals is that it may be significant that all
of the conclusions of the apparently invalid arguments have this flavor (as well as thepremise of the Contraposition example).  These are repeated in (30).
11(30) a.
(Even) if Bush wins, it won’t be by a large margin.  Therefore, (even) ifBush wins by a large margin, he won’t win.
b.
Andrew Jackson was President in 1836.  Therefore, (even) if Jackson died in1835, he was president in 1836.
c.
If I strike this match it will light.  Therefore, (even) if I pour water on thismatch and strike it, it will light.
I have to say I’m not sure at this point exactly what that significance is, but it seemedworth at least mentioning.3.4.  Negating conditional utterances. We turn finally to the problems involved innegating conditionals.  The first thing to note is that it is grammatically awkward tonegate a conditional.  This is a consequence of the fact that theif clause is a root modifier(a sentence adverbial), and as with other sentence adverbials, does not fall within thescope of a main clause negation.  This is shown in (31).(31) a.
Fortunately, Bill won’t call.
b.
If Sue raises, Bill  won’t call.
In both sentences in (31), the negation applies only to the main clause.  Thus the onlyoption in the case of conditionals is something like the cumbersomeIt is not the case thatconstruction, which is rarely used in everyday speech and about which we consequentlydo not have the strongest of intuitions.
Grice (1989a) notes that there are three ways that denial of a conditional may be
understood.  One way is to understand it simply truth functionally – i.e. denial ofIf Athen C meansA and not-C.  A situation Grice imagines in which this would be the case isthe somewhat artificial one in which bridge partners have a convention that a bid offiveno trump means ‘If I have a red king, I have a black king’, and one partner takes the otherto task after the hand for having bid incorrectly.  It should not be surprising that this kindof interpretation requires a somewhat artificial setting, given the additional elementsconveyed in less marked uses of conditionals.  But it is still important that negatedconditionals can have this interpretation.
Another possibility is that denial of a conditional will be understood to deny
whatever connection is conversationally implicated to hold between antecedent andconsequent.  These are readily accountable for as instances of metalinguistic negation(Horn 1985).  On the material conditional account, the negation of a conditionalIf A thenC is equivalent to assertion ofA and not-C, which is much easier to say thanIt is not thecase that if A then C.  It follows that, on general Gricean grounds, we would expect theutterer ofIt is not the case that if A then C to have some other point to their utterance, anda natural possibility would be the conditionality ofif, and more specifically any of theconversational implicatures arising from that conditionality.  One example might be thatin (32).(32)
It’s not the case that Harry will leaveif Sue leaves – he’ll leave anyway!
The natural construal of (32) is to deny the implied causal relationship between Harry’sleaving and Sue’s leaving.
For Grice the most problematic type of construal of a negated conditional is the
third possibility, where the negation seems to skip over the antecedent clause and land onthe consequent.  This may well be the most common case.  (Indeed, as noted above,Stalnaker’s version of the intensional analysis makes falsity ofIf A then C equivalent to
12truth ofIf A then not-C.)  Thus denying any of the conditionals in (33) would most likelyhave this interpretation.(33) a.
If I strike this match it will light.
b.
If you ask for permission, they’ll give it to you.
c.
If it rains, they’ll cancel the match.
The negated conditional in the first premise of Michael Jubien’s proof of the existence ofGod given above in (5), repeated here as (34), would be another example.(34)
If God doesn’t exist, then it’s not the case that if I’m evil, I’ll be punishedafter I die.
The most natural construal of the underlined negated conditional is that the speaker willnot be punished after he or she dies, even if he or she is evil.
Grice proposed a kind of quasi-logical ‘bracketing’ device for this problematic
construal, wherebyif clauses would automatically receive wide scope with respect toother operators.  However  he did not seem to be completely happy with this line ofattack (cf. Grice 1989a, 81ff).  Here I think we can bring in some of the more articulatedideas sketched above, which might add some semantic and pragmatic flesh to the brackethypothesis.  First, given their conditional meaning, as noted above,if clauses willtypically convey prior or background circumstances relative to those of the main,consequent clause.  Although they are not presupposed in the sense of being assumed tobe true in context (quite the contrary, due to the iffiness implicature), nevertheless theyshare the backgroundedness of presuppositions, and thus might be expected not to fallwithin the scope of a negation.  It is also worth noting that the negations underconsideration are most often taken to be denials of prior assertions of conditionals.  (Thisis not unusual for negative assertions in general; the carefully contrived Jubien exampleis an exception to that.)  Under those circumstances it would be very difficult indeed tohave a denial count as anything other than a denial of the consequent, given theantecedent conditions.4.  Conclusion.
The main purpose of this paper has been to try to support the material conditionalanalysis of English indicative conditionals.  One reason for doing so is that this analysisis the only one available which is consistent with the fact that indicative conditionals(unlike their subjunctive counterparts) are about the actual world, not alternativepossibilities.  Past defenses of this analysis have not drawn sufficiently on the manydifferences between natural language and the formal languages of logic that exist inaddition to the difference stressed by Grice 1975, 1989b (that natural languages but notformal ones are used in conversation).  The line taken here follows Jackson 1979 inpostulating a conventional implicature forif, as part of the mechanism to derive theconversational implicatures postulated by Grice, although the implicature put forwardhere is one of conditionality rather than Jackson’s robustness.  In addition to that we havecalled upon other aspects of conditional antecedents which exist in natural language butnot in formal languages, in order to try to explain (a) the role of conditionals in seeminglyinvalid (but actually valid) argument patterns, and (b) the fact that a negated conditionalis typically not construed as equivalent to assertion of the antecedent conjoined withdenial of the consequent.  Needless to say, these will not be the last words on this topic.
1314References
Abbott, Barbara.  2004.  Some remarks on indicative conditionals.  In Robert B. Young,
ed., Proceedings from Semantics and Linguistic Theory (SALT) XIV.  Ithaca, NY:Cornell University CLC Publications, 1-19.
Adams, Ernest.  1970.  Subjunctive and indicative conditionals.  Foundations of
Language 6, 89-94.
Adams, Ernest.  1975.  The logic of conditionals.  Dordrecht: Reidel..Bach, Kent.  1999.  The myth of conventional implicature.  Linguistics and Philosophy
22, 327-366.
Barker, Stephen J.  1991.Even,still, and counterfactuals.  Linguistics and Philosophy
14, 1-38.
Barker, Stephen J.  1994.  The consequent-entailment problem foreven if.  Linguistics
and Philosophy 17, 249-260.
Barker, Stephen J.  1997.  Material implication and general indicative conditionals.
Philosophical Quarterly 47, 195-211.
Bennett, Jonathan.  1982.  ‘Even if’.  Linguistics and Philosophy 5, 403-418.Bennett, Jonathan.  2003.  A philosophical guide to conditionals.  Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Dudman, V.H.  1991.  Interpretations of ‘if’-sentences.  In Frank Jackson, ed., 202-232.Edgington, Dorothy.  1986.  Do conditionals have truth-conditions?  Critica XVIII 52, 3-
30.  Reprinted in Frank Jackson, ed., 1991, 176-201.
Edgington, Dorothy.  1995.  On conditionals.  Mind 104, 235-329.Edgington, Dorothy.  2003.  What if?  Questions about conditionals.  Mind &amp; Language
18, 380-401.
von Fintel, Kai &amp; Sabine Iatridou.  2002.  If and whenif-clauses can restrict quantifiers.
Paper for the Workshop in Philosophy and Linguistics, University of Michigan,November 8-10, 2002.
Gibbard, Allan.  1980.  Two recent theories of conditionals.  In W.L. Harper, Robert
Stalnaker, and G. Pearce, eds., Ifs.  Dordrecht: Reidel, 211-247.
Goodman, Nelson.  1947.  The problem of counterfactual conditionals.  Journal of
Philosophy 44, 113-128.  Reprinted in Frank Jackson, ed., 1991, 9-27.
Grice, H. Paul.  1975.  Logic and conversation.  In Peter Cole &amp; Jerry L. Morgan, eds.,
Syntax and semantics, vol. 3: Speech acts.  New York: Academic Press, 41-58.Reprinted in H. Paul Grice, 1989b, 22-40.
Grice, H. Paul.  1989a.  Indicative conditionals.  In H. Paul Grice, 1989b, 58-85.Grice, H. Paul.  1989b.  Studies in the way of words.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Haegeman, Liliane.  2003.  Conditional clauses: external and internal syntax.  Mind &amp;
Language 18, 317-339.
Hanson, William H.  1991.  Indicative conditionals are truth-functional.  Mind, 53-72.Horn, Laurence R.  1985.  Metalinguistic negation and pragmatic ambiguity.  Language
61, 121-174.
Iatridou, Sabine.  2000.  The grammatical ingredients of counterfactuality.  Linguistic
Inquiry 31, 231-270.
15Jackson, Frank.  1979.  On assertion and indicative conditionals.  Philosophical Review
88, 565-589.  Reprinted in Frank Jackson, ed., 1991, 111-135.
Jackson, Frank, ed.  1991. Conditionals.  Oxford: Oxford University Press.Kaplan, David.  2005.  The meaning of ouch and oops: Explorations in the theory ofmeaning as use.  Los Angeles: UCLA, ms.
Kaufmann, Stefan.  2001.  Probabilities of conditionals.  In R. Hastings, B. Jackson &amp; Z.
Zvolenszky, eds., Proceedings of Semantics and Linguistic Theory (SALT) XI.Ithaca, NY: Cornell University CLC Publications, 248-267.
Kaufmann, Stefan.  2005.  Conditional predictions: A probabilistic account.  Linguistics
and Philosophy 28, 181-231.
Kratzer, Angelika.  1986.  Conditionals.  In CLS 22:2, 1-15.  Reprinted in Arnim von
Stechow &amp; Dieter Wunderlich, eds., 1991, Semantics: An international handbook ofcontemporary research.  Berlin: de Gruyter, 651-656.
Lewis, David.  1973.  Counterfactuals.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Lewis, David.  1975.  Adverbs of quantification.  In Edward L. Keenan, ed., Formal
semantics of natural language.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 3-15.
Lewis, David.  1976.  Probabilities of conditionals and conditional probabilities.
Philosophical Review 85, 297-315.
Lewis, David.  1986.  Probabilities of conditionals and conditional probabilities II.
Philosophical Review 95, 581-589.
Lycan, William G.  1991.Evenand even if.  Linguistics and Philosophy 14, 115-150.Lycan, William G.  2001.  Real conditionals.  Oxford: Clarendon Press.Montague, Richard.  1970.  Universal grammar.  In Theoria 36, 373-398.  Reprinted in
Richmond Thomason, ed., 1974, Formal philosophy: Selected papers of RichardMontague.  New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 222-246.
Ramsey, Frank.  1931.  The foundations of mathematics.  London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Stalnaker, Robert.  1968.  A theory of conditionals.  In Nicholas Rescher, ed., Studies in
logical theory.  Oxford: Blackwell, 98-112.
Stalnaker, Robert.  1975.  Indicative conditionals.  Philosophia 5, 269-286.  Reprinted in
Frank Jackson, ed., 1991, Conditionals.  Oxford: Oxford University Press, 136-154.
Strawson, P.F.  1986.  ‘If’ and ‘⊃’.  In Richard E. Grandy &amp; R. Warner, eds.,
Philosophical grounds of rationality.  Oxford: Clarendon Press, 229-242.
16
