Microsoft Word - TheContemporaryDeflationist.docThe Contemporary Deflationist
Nic Damnjanovic0. Introduction
Deflationism about truth is not what it used to be. Deflationists no longer make the strong
assertions for which they were once famous: they no longer claim that the truth predicate is
redundant, that there is no property of truth, that ‘true’ is not a predicate, or that ‘p’ and ‘the
proposition that p is true’ have the same meaning.1 Given the implausibility of many of these
claims it is understandable that contemporary deflationists have rejected them. And yet in doing
so, deflationists have left us without a clear sense of the distinction between their position and
that of their inflationary rivals. This is particularly troubling, since there seems to be a consensus
that the most important contemporary debate in the theory of truth (and content) is precisely that
between inflationists and deflationists.2
My goal in this paper is to offer an account of the distinction between contemporary
deflationism and inflationism by formulating the position common to a range of deflationists
including Hartry Field, Paul Horwich, Scott Soames, Christopher Hill, Wolfgang Künne3 and
Colin McGinn4. I argue that they share a view characterized by two central claims: the first is
that truth is a logical notion and the second is that in grasping the concept of truth we come to
know the property of truth in its essence. In other words, the first claim is that the truth predicate
is a logical predicate, the concept of truth is a logical concept and the property of truth is a
logical property. The second claim is that truth has no hidden essence – its essence is fully
revealed to us when we grasp the concept of truth. (With some historical precedent, I refer to this
claim as the principle of revelation.) In §§1 and 2, I explain what the two central deflationist
1claims amount to in more detail.5 In §3, I focus on two problems concerning the idea that the
nature of properties could be revealed to us in grasping the concept of them, and explain why the
assertion that truth is a logical property does notentail that it also satisfies the principle of
revelation.
Contemporary deflationists have not formulated their position in the way I have
suggested despite being committed to this position. This seems to me a mistake. As I shall argue
in §4, my formulation of deflationism has two important virtues: it makes it clear that a number
of the more implausible claims associated with contemporary deflationism are not essential to
the view, and it allows us to neatly distinguish contemporary deflationism from its inflationary
rivals. So even if the philosophers mentioned above unanimously reject my formulation of their
position, the version of deflationism I define is worthy of serious consideration in its own right.
Before beginning, I need to address a point of terminology. For ease of expression, I will
focus on deflationism as it applies to truth for propositions. The formulation of contemporary
deflationism I offer, however, applies equally to deflationism about truth for sentences, truth for
beliefs, or truth for any other type of truth-bearer. Of course, it should be remembered that the
plausibility of contemporary deflationism very much depends on the type of truth-bearers to
which it is applied.1. Truth as a Logical Notion
Although it is not often emphasized,contemporary deflationists typically endorse the idea that
truth is a logical notion. Field and Horwich have characterized their attitude toward truth with the
claim that “the truth predicate exists solely for the sake of a certain logical need”6 and is “a
‘logical predicate’ like ‘exists’ or ‘equals’”.7 Furthermore, both also claim that there is a
2corresponding property of truth which, as one would expect, is a logical property. McGinn and
Künne have also recently endorsed the claim that truth is a logical property.8
But what does it mean to say that truth is a logical notion? Providing a precise definition
of ‘logical notion’ is extremely difficult, and it would be a distraction to attempt to solve that
problem here. Instead, we can understand the deflationist claim well enough by considering
some paradigmatic cases of logical and non-logical expressions and logical and non-logical
properties. On the logical side, are expressions like ‘and’, ‘every’, ‘or’, ‘identity’ and ‘exists’.
and on the non-logical side are expressions like ‘blue’, ‘tree’, ‘magnetic’, ‘justice’ and
‘conscious’. Corresponding to these expressions, we have logical and non-logical properties and
relations. (Because any n-ary function can be thought of as an n+1-ary relation, I will speak of
functions, like the truth-function of conjunction, as relations, or relational properties.) The
contemporary deflationists position, therefore, is simply that truth is more like conjunction than
it is like magnetism.
While I don’t intend to say much more about the distinction between logical and non-
logical notions than this, there are two points about the distinction that need to be made. The first
is that it is consistent with calling truth a logical notion that there be borderline cases of concepts
and properties for which we are not sure whether to call them logical or not. It is enough for our
purposes to say that the deflationist maintains that truth is a clear example of a logical notion,
just as conjunction is. The second point is that disagreements over whether truth is a logical
notion or not are not to be confused with disagreements over whether certain terms in a formal
language should be classed as logical constants or not. For while there is some debate over
whether ‘=’ is to be classed as a logical constant in predicate logic, I doubt there could be a
3similar debate over whether the concept of identity is more like the concepts of conjunction and
existence than the concepts of magnetism and justice.1.1 ‘True’ as a Logical Predicate
As I have intimated already, in formulating their position, contemporary deflationists would be
best served by remaining neutral on the question of how to define the class of logical predicates.
Nevertheless, it would be helpful to have at least some idea of the sorts of account of the
meaning of ‘true’ that support the claim that it is a logical predicate. Fortunately, contemporary
deflationists have suggested at least two broad approaches that fit the bill.
One approach is to argue that the semantics of the truth predicate are very similar to the
semantics for other logical expressions. For example, if the truth predicate is merely a device of
disquotation, undoing the effect of quotation marks, then as far as its semantics goes, it is clearly
on all fours with other logical expressions, most notably quotation marks themselves (at least if
we read quotation marks as standing for a quotation function). Alternatively, Tim Maudlin has
argued that giving the semantics for ‘true’ is just like giving the semantics for ‘and’ – it is simply
a matter of pointing to a certain truth-function. That is, he suggests that the truth predicate
expresses the ‘identity-map’ truth function so that attributions of truth to a proposition have the
same truth-value as the proposition to which truth is being attributed. On this account, too, the
truth predicate is on all fours with other logical expressions.9
A second sort of approach is to show that the concept of truth is a logical concept by
showing that it can be defined solely in terms of concepts we all agree are logical. For example,
one could define truth using (S1).
S1. For all x, x is true iff Σp((x = ‘p’) and p).
4As (S1) appeals just to universal quantification, the biconditional, existential substitutional
quantification, quotation marks, identity and conjunction, it entails that truth is a logical notion.
Similarly, while Hill has not explicitly endorsed the claim that ‘true’ is a logical predicate, he is
committed to that view. He has offered a version of deflationism, called substitutionalism, that
defines truth using a claim very similar to (S2).
S2. For all x, x is true iff Σp((x = the proposition that p) and p).
Hill claims that definitions like this one ‘reduce semantic concepts to substitutional
quantification’10 and so to a logical concept. We should keep in mind, however, that this sort of
definition makes essential use of the expression ‘the proposition that p’. If, like Künne, you are
worried that ‘the proposition that p’ is not strictly a logical notion, then we can follow him and
retreat to the claim that truth is abroadly logical notion.11
So, without tackling the question of what counts as a logical expression, the
contemporary deflationist can argue that ‘true’ is a logical predicate by either arguing that the
truth predicate is semantically akin to other logical expressions, or by arguing that it can be
defined in terms of them. By pursuing either approach, the contemporary deflationist takes up a
stance on the kind of logical predicate ‘true’ is. It should be clear, then, that while contemporary
deflationists agree that truth is a logical notion, and so that all uses of the truth predicate can be
understood as uses of a logical device, there is room for considerable disagreement about what
sort of logical device it is.1.2 Truth as a logical property
As contemporary deflationists hold that the truth predicate is a logical predicate, so they hold that
the property of being true is a logical property. While this claim about the property of truth may
5seem to follow straightforwardly from the claim that truth is a logical notion, it does so only if
we accept that logical expressions express properties or relations at all. Indeed, it was once quite
common for deflationism to be described as the view that there is no property of truth associated
with the word ‘true’. However, it is not entirely clear who, if any, of the traditional deflationists
actually held this view,12 and contemporary deflationists surely do not.
This fact has been more widely recognised in recent discussions and more careful
commentators have characterized deflationism as the view that truth is not a genuine property, or
not a property with a nature.13 Neither of these characterizations is very helpful, however, until
we have an idea of what separates genuine properties from non-genuine, or of what it is for a
property to have no nature. But, more importantly, according to all these attempts at formulation,
property nominalists will automatically count as deflationists about truth. As nominalists think
that there are no properties, and so no genuine properties, they would agree that the truth
predicate doesn’t stand for a property, a genuine property, or a property with a nature. Surely,
though, one can be a nominalist without being a deflationist about truth.
For these reasons it would be unwise to formulate deflationism in general, or
contemporary deflationism in particular, with either the claim that truth is not a property, or not a
genuine property, or not a property with a nature. Similarly, we do not want to insist that one
cannot be a deflationist about truth while denying that there is a property of truth – for then all
nominalists would be banned from being deflationists, and deflationism would stand or fall
depending on the truth of nominalism. Instead, we should focus on the claim that truth is a
logical notion. If in the future nominalism is proven true, then we shall have to view talk of the
property of truth as misguided. In the meantime, we should do as contemporary deflationists do,
and speak of the property of truth where it seems right to do so. Furthermore, while some
6deflationists may want to make the mysterious claim that truth is a property with no nature,qua
deflationist they are not committed to any such claim. Instead, as I shall argue, they are only
committed to the view that any nature that the property of truth has is fully revealed to us when
we grasp the concept of truth. That is, contemporary deflationists endorse the principle of
revelation as applied to truth.2. Revelation
The expression ‘principle of revelation’ is familiar from the literature on colour and colour
experience. As I explain below, there is a close connection between the meaning of the
expression in that literature, and the meaning I intend it to have here. For the moment, though, it
will help if we forget about this other use of the expression and focus on the following
formulation.
Revelation: grasping a concept F reveals to us the whole essence of the property of being
F.
For very many concepts, this principle will be obviously false. For example, when we grasp the
concept of gold, we do not thereby grasp the whole essence of the property of being gold. This is
because it is possible to meet all the conditions on grasping the concept of gold without knowing
that gold is essentially a substance composed of atoms with atomic number 79. In contrast, there
are some concepts for which the principle of revelation is plausible. David Lewis has suggested
that the principle of revelation might be true of the part-whole relation.14 The part-whole relation
is as good a candidate for a logical relation as any, and other logical properties and relations also
seem to satisfy revelation, including conjunction. Consider the following passage from Maudlin:
7... there is nothing more to know about conjunction once one has the truth table
which shows how the truth value of a conjunction is determined by the truth
values of its immediate semantic constituents. (2004: 70)
On one way of reading Maudlin here, he is stating that the nature of conjunction is fully revealed
to us when we know the standard truth table for conjunction. Assuming, as is extremely
plausible, that grasping the concept of conjunction essentially involves (at least implicitly)
grasping the information that the truth table represents, we have the principle of revelation:
grasping the concept of conjunction reveals to us the whole essence of the property of
conjunction.
There is a close analogy between Maudlin’s comments about conjunction and the
contemporary deflationist’s views on truth. As we saw, grasping the concept of conjunction
involves grasping the way in which the truth values of conjunctions depend on the truth values of
their immediate semantic constituents. Similarly, contemporary deflationists hold that when we
grasp the concept of truth, we grasp the way in which attributions of truth are themselves made
true. Deflationists therefore think that truth has no hidden essence, of either a logical or non-
logical kind, that awaits our discovery through some sort of a priori or a posterioriinvestigation.
There are a number of ways that this basic idea can be developed. One approach would
be to follow Maudlin and maintain that the truth predicate stands for the ‘identity map’ truth
function. If one takes this route, then the analogy between conjunction and truth is very tight
indeed. An alternative approach is to maintain that the central fact about the concept of truth is
that in grasping the concept we come to believe the instances of (PT).15
PT. The proposition that p is true if and only if p.
8Now, the right hand sides of instances of (PT) tell us the conditions which must be met for the
propositions mentioned on the left hand side to be true. So in grasping the instances of (PT), we
grasp the way in which attributions of truth are themselves made true. Moreover, if knowing
what it takes for truth-bearers to be true is knowing the essence of truth, then grasping the
concept of truth reveals the essence of truth.  On  either  approach, the driving idea seems to be
that truth satisfies the principle of revelation.
Before moving on, I should explain the relation between the principle of revelation I am
using here and the more familiar principle of revelation discussed in the literature on colour and
colour experience. The most obvious difference between the two conceptions of revelation is that
while I have been discussing a relation between grasping concepts and the nature of properties,
the principle discussed in the colour literature focuses on a relation betweenexperience of certain
properties and knowing the essence of those properties. For example, Mark Johnston has
described the principle of revelation as applied to the colour canary yellow as follows:
Revelation: The intrinsic nature of canary yellow is fully revealed by a standard
visual experience as of a canary yellow thing. (1992: 223)
And Russell endorsed revelation inThe Problems of Philosophy:
I know the colour perfectly and completely when I see it and no further
knowledge of it itself is even theoretically possible. (1912: 47).
Clearly, the notion of revelation I have been using makes no essential reference to the experience
of certain properties, and in fact I have argued that certain logical properties, of which it appears
to makes no sense to speak of having experiences, satisfy the principle of revelation.
9
However, the similarity between the two applications of the notion of revelation becomes
clear if we see Johnston’sexperientialprinciple of revelation as made up of two claims. Let’s
say that someone asserts that experiential revelation is true of some property, F. The first claim
being made is that to experience F is to grasp the concept of F, or to know what F is. The second
claim says that if you grasp the concept of F, you know F in its essence. Putting these two claims
together gives us the experiential concept of revelation, that the essence of a property is revealed
to us in an experience as of that property. Moreover, the second claim, that if you grasp the
concept of F you know F in its essence, is identical to the notion ofconceptual revelation that I
have been working with. Once we notice that the principle of conceptual revelation is part of the
principle of experiential revelation, it is easy to generalize the notion of revelation to other, non-
experiential, properties like truth or the part-whole relation.163. Problems for Revelation
According to my formulation of contemporary deflationism, this position is made up of two
central assertions: that truth is a logical notion and that it satisfies the principle of revelation.
However, while the idea that truth is a logical notion is relatively clear, it might be worried that
the principle of revelation is too unclear a notion to be of use in formulating a philosophical
position. Moreover, even if we could clarify this principle, there areprima facie reasons for
thinking that it is not satisfied by the concept of truth. I’ll address these concerns in reverse
order.
103.1 Two versions of revelation
Although truth seems to be one of our simplest concepts, it is quite likely that spelling out the
nature of this concept or the associated property will be far from simple – witness the
sophisticated technical literature devoted to dealing with the paradoxes. In light of this, it is
probably to be expected that some of the concepts required to formulate the correct account of
truth will be concepts that the average person who grasps the concept of truth does not possess.
How then could anyone maintain that in grasping the concept of truth the full nature of truth is
revealed to us?
Furthermore, even contemporary deflationists seem committed to denying revelation. For
example, as we have seen, some contemporary deflationists claim that (S2) tells us the nature of
truth.
S2. For all x, x is true iff Σp((x = the proposition that p) and p).
Yet if the quantifier in (S2) is a substitutional quantifier, or some other slightly esoteric
quantifier, it might be that we can grasp the concept of truth without understanding (S2) and so
without accepting it. Similarly, other contemporary deflationists claim that it is the collection of
all instances of (PT) that tell us the full nature of truth.
PT. The proposition that p is true if and only if p.
Yet it is surely implausible to maintain that in grasping the concept of truth we come to believe
all the instances of (PT). There will only be a relatively small number of such instances that any
person can understand. Yet most (all?) of us grasp the concept of truth. So, again, it looks like we
have good reason for rejecting the claim that revelation is true of truth.
11
However, it is important to see that there are two different ways to unpack the principle
of revelation. Suppose someone offers a version of ( G) as a claim about the nature of F.
G. Necessarily, for all x (x is F if and only if x is H),
On one way of reading the principle of revelation, the strong reading, to be consistent with
revelation some version of ( G) can only be about the nature of F if it is not possible to grasp
the concept F and yet not accept ( G). In particular, suppose we can grasp the concept F without
grasping the concept H. In this situation it is possible, and perhaps likely, that we will not accept
( G). On the strong reading of revelation, this entails that if revelation is true of F, then ( G)
does not tell us about the nature of F. On a weaker reading of revelation, if the principle of
revelation is true for some property F, all that follows is thatif we understand the relevant
version of ( G) we will accept it. On this reading of revelation, if we can grasp concept F
without grasping concept H, ( G) can still tell us the nature of F as long as anyone who grasps
both F and H must accept it.
Contemporary deflationists are only committed to this latter, weaker reading of
revelation. Thus they can hold that (S2) or the instances of (PT) tell us the nature of truth without
being committed to the claim that all those who grasp the concept of truth must be willing to
accept them. Instead, contemporary deflationists only suppose that all those who understand (S2),
for example, will accept it. Similarly, even if deflationists believe that the full account of the
nature of truth is given by all the instances of (PT), and endorse the weaker version of revelation,
they are not thereby committed to the claim that all those who possess the concept of truth must
accept, or believe, all instances of (PT). This is fortunate, as this account of the possession
conditions for the concept of truth is surely implausible.17 For these reasons, it would be a bad
12idea to follow Julian Dodd and formulate deflationism as the position that possessing the concept
of truth requires being disposed to accept all instances of (PT).183.2 Judgements about essences
There are reasons to doubt that the principle of revelation, and indeed any claim about a property
having no hidden nature, is clear enough to play a helpful role in the formulation of a
philosophical position. Principally, the worry about revelation is that we don’t have a clear
distinction between those statements that tell us something about the nature, or essence, of some
thing and those that don’t. Yet we need to know how to make this distinction if we are to be able
to determine when discoveries about truth are discoveries about truth’s nature and when they are
merely discoveries about non-essential features of truth.
It might be thought that making the distinction between essential and non-essential
properties is easy: the essential properties of some thing are just those properties it has
necessarily. In the case of truth, then, something is an essential truth about truth if and only if it
is a necessary truth that involves the concept of truth. However, Kit Fine has made a strong case
for rejecting this account of the essential properties of things. As Fine points out, it is a necessary
property of Socrates that he belongs to the singleton set containing only Socrates. That is, there
are no possible worlds in which Socrates exists but in which there is not the singleton set
containing only Socrates. Yet it is surely not part of the essence of Socrates that he belongs to
that singleton set.19 Similarly it is a necessary truth that 7 + 5 = 12, which means of course that,
necessarily, the proposition that 7 + 5 = 12 is true. Yet it is surely not part of the essence of truth
that the proposition that 7 + 5 = 12 possesses it. We can grasp the essence of truth and
understand the claim that 7 + 5 = 12, without knowing that 7 + 5 = 12, just as we can grasp the
13essence of Socrates without knowing which sets he belongs to. Therefore, it seems that the
essential truths are different from the necessary truths.
These considerations suggest that we need some other way to distinguish the essential
and non-essential properties of things. And while in some cases we can rely on our intuitive or
pre-theoretical notion of essential properties, as we did in rejecting the identification of essential
properties and necessary properties, this is often not the case when we are dealing with logical or
mathematical properties. For example, consider the mathematical property of being an angle in a
semi-circle. It is possible for someone to grasp the concept of an angle in the semi-circle, and
thereby know how to construct and identify such angles, and yet not know all the necessary
truths about angles in semi-circles. Indeed, it is possible to grasp this concept without even
knowing all the a priori necessary truths about angles in semi-circles. It is easy to imagine a
person (our own former selves for example) fully grasping the concept at some time and only
later being shown, or themselves reasoning to the conclusion, that all such angles are exactly 90
degrees in size. Now is this discovery a discovery about the nature of angles in semi-circles? If
so, then revelation is not true of this concept. But how do we decide? It seems tome that this is a
case where a mathematical property fails to satisfy revelation, but what to say to someone who
denies this? What principles about essential properties could we appeal to to settle the matter?
The fact that there isn’t a neat way to resolve this issue seems to demonstrate that without a
philosophical explication of essential properties it will be hard to determine whether or not
certain logical or mathematical properties satisfy the principle of revelation.
It seems that this will be so in the case of truth as well. There are some necessary, a priori
truths about truth that presumably no one would suppose tell us about the essence of truth. An
obvious example is (D).
14D. A disjunction is true if and only if one of its disjuncts is true.
Thus it would be no objection to the claim that revelation is true of truth to point out that it is
possible to understand (D) without accepting it. Yet there are other cases that are less clear-cut.
For example, some philosophers suppose Tarski to have shown us how to define truth in terms of
reference and satisfaction (at least for certain formal languages). Does this discovery reveal part
of the essence of truth? How can we tell?20 Without an explication of the difference between
essential and non-essential features it is very difficult to know what to say about such cases.
Nevertheless, on the basis of these problems alone, it would be wrong to draw the
conclusion that we should not formulate contemporary deflationism using the principle of
revelation. For although we don’t yet have an explication of essential properties, we also don’t
have good reason to suppose that we won’t be able to refine our understanding of the situations
in which claims about a property tell us about the nature of the property. Furthermore, the
distinction between essential and non-essential properties is of fundamental importance
throughout philosophy. So, if we can use it to formulate important positions in other areas of
philosophy, we should be allowed to use the distinction to formulate contemporary deflationism.
Since the distinction is so fundamental, it would be a mistake to reject it simply because we don’t
yet have a clear philosophical explication of it. Instead, we should hope that thinking about the
difficult cases will lead to a better understanding of the distinction.
 Thereis an important lesson to be drawn from the angle in the semi circle case, though.
Although a mathematical example, the case should make us hesitate before assuming that all
logical properties satisfy the principle of revelation.21 For it is at least not clear whether or not
the property of being an angle in a semi circle satisfies revelation. It is for this reason that it is
15best to formulate contemporary deflationism as endorsing not only the claim that truth is a
logical notion, butalso the claim that revelationis true of truth.4. Virtues of the Proposed Formulation
Hopefully, by now it is relatively clear what the claim that truth is a logical notion that satisfies
the principle of revelation amounts to. In this final section I’d like to point out some of the more
important virtues of formulating contemporary deflationism in this way. One such virtue is that
this formulation seems to entail some of the contemporary deflationist’s most distinctive claims,
including that truth is a property that cannot be neatly defined in terms of the non-logical, and
that it is a property without a hidden essence. But the proposed formulation has two other
important virtues: it makes clear that some of the more implausible claims associated with
contemporary deflationism are not essential to the view (§4.1), and it allows us to neatly
distinguish contemporary deflationism from inflationism (§4.2).4.1 What the contemporary deflationist is not committed to.
We’ve already seen that a number of implausible claims typically associated with deflationism
are not essential parts of the theory. The contemporary deflationist is not committed to the claim
that truth is not a property, nor the claim that it is a property without a nature (whatever that
means). Nor is the contemporary deflationist committed to the implausible claim that possessing
the concept of truth requires being disposed to acceptall instances of (PT).
However, there are other claims frequently identified with contemporary deflationism,
and which some contemporary deflationists accept, that are neither plausible nor essential to the
deflationist position. I have in mind the claims that i) possessing the concept of truth is a matter
16of being disposed to accept certain instances of (PT) (Horwich 1998b: 121), ii) that the content
of the concept truth is exhausted by the instances of (PT) (Collins 2002) and iii) that the
instances of (PT) taken together tell us the full nature of truth (Horwich 1998b).
To begin with, notice that iii), the claim about the exhaustion of the nature of truth,
follows directly from either i) or ii), when they are combined with the principle of revelation. For
if what we grasp when we grasp the concept of truth is exhausted by the instances of (PT), then,
given revelation, the instances of (PT) must tell us the full nature of truth. Given that
contemporary deflationists accept revelation, I suggest that it is because some of them also
accept either the account of concept possession or the account of the content of the concept of
truth that they assert that the instances of (PT) exhaust the nature of truth. Yet neither i) nor ii)
are essential to contemporary deflationism, and we have good reasons to doubt them both.
First, it is clear that the contemporary deflationist is not committed toany account of
what it takes to possess the concept of truth. In the debate about truth between inflationists and
deflationists, it is not what it takes to possess the concept of truth that is at issue, but rather the
nature of the concept – it’s content – and the nature of the property of truth. And while certain
claims about thecontent of the concept of truth might be incompatible with other claims about
what it takes topossess the concept of truth, it is clear that theories of the content of the concept
and theories of the possession conditions for a concept are two different things. We could give
accounts of the content of all our concepts, and still have no account of what it takes to possess a
concept beyond the trivial claim that possessing a concept requires grasping the concept’s
content. Indeed, providing a positive account of what it takes to grasp a concept, and what facts
determine the meanings of words, is perhaps the most important task facing the philosophy of
17meaning and content. And, in particular, Kripke (1982) has given us good reason for thinking
that any sort of dispositional account of concept possession is bound to fail.22
But this problem is not the deflationist’s alone. No one has a good account of what it
takes to grasp the concept of truth, or any other concept for that matter. We have no reason to
think that when we find a workable account of concept possession the deflationist won’t be able
to help themselves to it. In the meantime, though, contemporary deflationists may as well refrain
from offering any account of what it takes to possess the concept of truth.23
What about ii), the assertion that the content of the concept of truth is exhausted by the
instances of (PT)? At least one prominent contemporary deflationist, Soames, has rejected this
claim. He says that:
... we find some T-propositions about “higher-level” (truth-attributing)
propositions fully acceptable, even trivial; others we find puzzling and
pathological; while still others are outright paradoxical. These reactions are not
arbitrary. There is something about our grasp of the notion of truth that guides
them. No account that leaves this out can be complete. Rather an adequate theory
of truth must correctly identify the different classes of T-propositions –
unproblematic, pathological and paradoxical – and it must explain why these
different classes have the characteristics they do. (1999: 24)
Soames is arguing that an account of what we grasp in grasping the concept of truth must explain
why we find some instances of (PT) to be unproblematic while others appear pathological or
even paradoxical. However, as he points out, if the content of the concept of truth is exhausted
by instances of (PT), there can be no explanation of why we are not disposed to accept the
18pathological instances of (PT), and why it would in some sense bewrong to accept such
instances, that appeals only to what we grasp in grasping the concept of truth.
Soames’s point here seems plausible. More importantly, even if he is wrong about the
content of the concept of truth there is nothing anti-deflationary about his position.
Contemporary deflationists can hold on to their claims that truth is a logical notion, that truth has
no hidden essence, that the truth predicate is merely a device of disquotation and so on, without
accepting that the content of truth is exhausted by the instances of (PT). More specifically, it is
consistent with deflationism to hold that thinking about the paradoxes of truth might show us
what more there is to the content of this concept, especially since investigations into the
paradoxes will likely only reveal some furtherlogical feature of the truth predicate.
I take it to be an important virtue of the proposed formulation of contemporary
deflationism that it allows room for us to say more about the content of the truth predicate than is
said by the collection of instances of (PT). Specifically, my formulation leaves room for the sort
of logical and mathematical explorations whose goal is to explain the principles governing the
application of the truth predicate in order to understand how these give rise to the pathological
and the paradoxical instances and also to show us what to say about these cases. Furthermore, I
take it to be one of the deflationist’s most important insights that the real philosophical challenge
posed by the concept of truth is to provide an account of the content of the concept of truth that
meets these explanatory demands.
We have seen, then, that there are two further claims often attributed to the contemporary
deflationist, that they are not in fact committed to: they are not committed to any sort of
dispositional account of possessing the concept of truth, and they are not committed to the claim
that the instances of (PT) exhaust the content of the concept of truth. As I pointed out above, it
19appears that it is only because we can use either of these two claims, together with the principle
of revelation, to derive the conclusion that the instances of (PT) exhaust the nature of truth that
deflationists have sometimes endorsed that view about truth’s nature. Therefore, unless some
other way for arguing for this latter view is discovered, contemporary deflationists are not
committed to that claim either. Having retreated from so much that is often held to be distinctive
of contemporary deflationism, it is important to see whether the twin claims that truth is a logical
notion and that it satisfies revelation are together enough to distinguish this position from its
inflationary alternatives.4.2 Inflationism vs Deflationism
First, consider the claim that truth is a logical notion. While inflationists can, and typically do,
agree with the contemporary deflationist about the useful logical function of the truth predicate
(specifically its role in allowing us to express generalizations like ‘Everything Kripke says is
true’) they must deny that this logical function exhausts the meaning of the truth predicate.
Otherwise, inflationists would be committed to seeing ‘true’ as a logical predicate and then,
having accepted this much, it is hard to see what motivation they could have for denying that
truth is a logical notion. And, indeed, inflationists almost always do deny that truth is a logical
notion.
Traditionally, there have been two families of theories opposed to deflationism about
truth: epistemic theories and correspondence theories of truth. Epistemic theories of truth, as the
name suggests, treat truth as an epistemic notion. Some of what the early coherence theorists like
Joachim (1906) and Blanshard (1939) said about coherence suggest that they saw coherence as
an epistemic notion and that they thought truth was to be defined in terms of coherence. Less
20equivocally, Peirce (1878) held truth to be what we would believe at the end of an ideal inquiry
and some of the logical empiricists (Neurath for example) held that truth was to be treated as
verification. More recently, Putnam (1983) at one stage seemed to hold that truth was to be
identified withideal verification. All these inflationary theories are obviously opposed to
contemporary deflationism, as where they hold truth to be an epistemic notion, contemporary
deflationists maintain it is a logical one.
On the other hand, early correspondence theories of truth, like those endorsed by Russell
(1918) and the early Wittgenstein (1921), rejected epistemic accounts of truth. For them, truth
was to be identified with a correspondence relation betweenbeliefsand facts. Spelling out the
nature of this correspondence relation has proved extremely difficult, but it seems that Russell
and Wittgenstein saw the relation as some sort of representational relation, and not a type of
logical relation. In recent years, correspondence theories have taken a rather different form.
Following Field (1972) many of those who now consider themselves correspondence theorists
attempt to definesentential truth in terms of reference and satisfaction and then provide
reductions of these latter two notions. This sort of correspondence theorist does not treat
reference and satisfaction as logical notions, but rather attempts to reduce the notions of
reference and satisfaction to the non-semantic (and non-logical). Because of this, any notion of
truth defined in terms of reference and satisfaction will not be a logical notion.
It is possible, of course, to maintain that reference and satisfactionare logical notions.24
If this is the case, then defining truth in terms of reference and satisfaction is no longer
incompatible with the idea that sentential truth is a logical notion. Similarly, perhaps some form
of coherence theorist might mean by ‘coherence’ mere logical consistency, so that to say that a
proposition coheres with some set of propositions is just to say that the addition of the
21proposition to the set results in a logically consistent set if the original set was logically
consistent. On this approach coherenceis a logical notion and so maintaining that a proposition
is true if and only if it coheres is consistent with contemporary deflationism for propositional
truth. Furthermore, even someone attracted to a more traditional correspondence theory may hold
that the relation of correspondence between truth-bearers and facts is a logical relation. In
particular, following Hill, one could characterize the correspondence relation in a way that is
consistent with deflationism, using (SC).
SC. For any thought x and state of affairs y, x bears R to y if and only if (Σp (x =
the thought that p and y = the state of affairs that p). (2002: 49).
On this account, the correspondence relation, R, is a logical relation between thoughts
(propositions) and states of affairs. So, again, it is consistent with contemporary deflationism to
hold that a proposition is true if and only if it corresponds to some state-of-affairs.
However, it would be quite obviously against the spirit of deflationism, and
contemporary deflationism in particular, to maintain that any of these purported definitions of
truth constituted a contribution to the theory of truth, or told us anything about thenature of
truth. For even if, for example, coherence is a logical notion, no deflationist would accept that
coherence is the essence or nature of truth. Deflationists allow that it might be a necessary truth,
perhaps even a necessary a priori truth, that a proposition is true if and only if it coheres with
some set of propositions, but will deny that this fact constitutes part of the nature of truth.
Fortunately, my proposed formulation of contemporary deflationism excludes such theories on
the grounds that they do not satisfy the principle of revelation. As it is possible to grasp the
concept of truth without accepting that all truths correspond to some fact, or that all truths are
22logically consistent with some ideal set of beliefs, any theory that implies such claims tell us the
nature of truth conflicts with contemporary deflationism as I have formulated it.
The commitment to the principle of revelation also distinguishes contemporary
deflationism from the different kinds of functionalist account of truth recently championed by
Crispin Wright and Mark Lynch.25 These accounts provide a functional definition of ‘true’ by
listing a range of platitudes about truth, including (PT). In other words, Wright and Lynch hope
to uncover a functional specification of the property of truth so that we can assert that truth is
whatever property plays this specified functional role. They hope to uncover such a functional
role by considering the principles involving truth that we come to grasp in grasping the concept
of truth. However, once they have uncovered a functional definition (relying on (PT) and other
platitudes), Wright and Lynch then attempt to find the realizer or, acknowledging the potential
for multiple realization, realizers for this functional role. That is, they attempt to discover the
properties that play the truth-role specified by their functional definition.
This approach to truth is anathema to contemporary deflationists. Deflationists do not
believe that we need to undertake any investigation to discover the nature of truth. Wright sees a
difference here too.
The real distinction, then, between [functionalism] and deflationism in respect of the
issue whether truth is a property is not that the deflationist cannot consistently allow that
it is, but rather that [functionalism] allows more: precisely, that the character of the
property may not be transparent from the analysis of the concept. (2001: 753)
That is, deflationism, but not Wright’s functionalist theory, claims that truth’s nature is revealed
to us when we grasp the concept of truth.26
235. Conclusion
The fact that the twin claims that truth is a logical notion and that it satisfies the principle of
revelation so neatly distinguish deflationism from inflationism is important. We need a clear idea
of the difference between deflationists and inflationists, and yet previous attempts to demarcate
the two camps have either allowed inflationary theories to count as deflationary, or have
attributed to deflationists an implausibly strong position. Furthermore, it is important to have
seen that the core position shared by contemporary deflationist does not include the implausible
claims that are often associated with the position. For these reasons, the deflationary position I
have outlined is the one to beat, regardless of whether I am right in attributing the view to the
real, live contemporary deflationists. It holds on to the core insights of the deflationist without
overshooting into unnecessarily strong assertions about either the concept or the property of
truth.
Of course, the position I have formulated is incomplete in a number of respects. Most
importantly, it makes no claim about the type of logical notion that truth is. This is no reason for
complaint, however. For, on the one hand, the view is put forward as ageneral position that all
contemporary deflationists can (and should) share. And, on the other hand, remaining agnostic
about the correct account of the logic of the truth predicate is the right thing to do, given the fact
that we have no generally acceptable solution to the many paradoxes involving truth.
24References
Ayer, A.J. 1936. Language, Truth and Logic, second edition (London: Gollancz, 1946).
Blanshard, B. 1939.The Nature of Thought (London: George Allen and Unwin); 2 volumes.
Boghossian, P.A. 1990. ‘The Status of Content’,Philosophical Review, 99: 157-84.
Brandom, R. 1988. ‘Pragmatism, Phenomenalism, and Truth-Talk’, in French, P., Uehling, T.
and Wettstein, H. eds.Realism and Antirealism: Midwest Studies in Philosophy, vol. 12,
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press): 75-93.
Collins, J. 2002. ‘On the Proposed Exhaustion of Truth’,Dialogue: Canadian PhilosophicalReview, 41 (4): 653-79.
Dodd, J. 2000.An Identity Theory of Truth (New York: St. Martin’s Press).
Engel, P. 2002. Truth (Chesham: Acumen).
Field, H. 1972. ‘Tarski’s Theory of Truth’,Journal of Philosophy, 69: 347-75 andreprinted in
Field 2001: 3-26. Page references are to the latter.
Field, H. 1992. ‘Critical notice: Paul Horwich’sTruth’,Philosophy of Science, 59: 321-30.
Field, H. 1994. ‘Deflationist Views of Meaning and Content’,Mind, 103: 249-84 and reprinted
in Field 2001: 104-140. Page references are to the latter.
Field, H. 2001.Truth and the Absence of Fact (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Fine, K. 1994. ‘Essence and Modality: The Second Philosophical Perspectives Lecture’,Philosophical Perspectives, 8, Logic and Language: 1-16.
Hill, C. 2002.Thought and World: An Austere Portrayal of Truth, Reference, and SemanticCorrespondence (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
25Horwich, P. 1998a.Meaning (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Horwich, P. 1998b.Truth (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Joachim, H.H. 1906.The Nature of Truth (London: Oxford University Press, 1939).
Johnston, M. 1992. ‘How to Speak of the Colours’,Philosophical Studies, 68: 221-63.
Kripke, S. 1982.Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).
Künne, W. 2003.Conceptions of Truth (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Lance, M. 1997. ‘The Significance of Anaphoric Theories of Truth and Reference’, in
Villanueva, E. ed.,Philosophical Issues 8: Truth (Atascedero, Calif.: Ridgeview
Publishing Company): 181-198.
Lewis, D. 1997. ‘Naming the Colours’,Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 75: 325-42.
Reprinted in hisPapers in Metaphysics and Epistemology (Cambridge University Press,
1999): 325-31. Page references to the latter.
Lynch, M. 2001a. ‘Introduction’ in Lynch, M. ed.The Nature of Truth (Cambridge, MA and
London: MIT Press, 2001): 1-6.
Lynch, M. 2001b. ‘A Functionalist Theory of Truth’, in Lynch, M. ed.The Nature of Truth
(Cambridge, MA and London: MIT Press, 2001): 723-49.
Maudlin, T. 2004.Truth and Paradox: Solving the Riddles (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
McGinn, C. 2000.Logical Properties: Identity, Existence, Predication, Necessity, Truth (Oxford:
Clarendon Press).
26Peirce, C.S. 1878. ‘How to Make Our Ideas Clear’, in Hartshorne, C. and Weiss, P. eds.Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vol. V (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press
of Harvard University Press, 1960): 248-71.
Putnam, H. 1983.Reason, Truth and History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Richard, M. 1997. ‘Deflating Truth’, in Villanueva, E. (ed)Philosophical Issues, 8 (Atascedero,
Calif.: Ridgeview Publishing Company): 57-78.
Russell, B. 1904. ‘Meinong’s Theory of Complexes and Assumptions,’ in Lackey, D. ed.Essaysin Analysis (New York; Braziller): 21-76.
Russell, B. 1912.The Problems of Philosophy (London: Oxford University Press, 1946).
Russell, B. 1918. ‘The Philosophy of Logical Atomism’, inThe Collected Papers of BertrandRussell, Volume 8: The Philosophy of Logical Atomism and Other Essays 1914-19
(London: George Allen and Unwin): 160-244.
Soames, S. 1984. ‘What is a Theory of Truth?’Journal of Philosophy, 81: 411-29. Reprinted in
Lynch, M. ed. 2001: 397-418. Page references are to the latter.
Soames, S. 1999.Understanding Truth (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Soames, S. 2003. ‘Understanding deflationism’,Philosophical Perspectives, 17, Language and
Philosophical Linguistics: 369-83.
Sosa, E. 1993. ‘Epistemology, Realism, and Truth: The First Philosophical Perspectives
Lecture’,Philosophical Perspectives, 7, Language and Logic: 1-16.
Stoljar, D. 2006.Ignorance and Imagination: On the Epistemic Origin of the Problem ofConsciousness (New York: Oxford University Press).
27Vision, G. 2004.Veritas: The Correspondence Theory and Its Critics (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press).
Wittgenstein, L. 1921. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1922).
Wright, C. 1992.Truth and Objectivity (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press).
Wright, C. 2001. ‘Minimalism, Deflationism, Pragmatism, Pluralism’, in Lynch, M. ed.TheNature of Truth (Cambridge, MA and London: MIT Press, 2001): 751- 87.
1 There is at least one notable exception to this claim: Robert Brandom is a deflationist who
insists that ‘true’ is not a predicate. Brandom (1988).
2 For example, Boghossian says: ‘Whether truth is robust or deflationary is the biggest decision a
theorist of truth must make’ (1990: 165, fn. 17). See also Field (1994: 107).
3 The key works of these philosophers are Field (1994), (2001); Horwich (1998a), (1998b);
Soames (1984), (1999); Hill (2002); Künne (2003).
4 McGinn says he is not a deflationist because i) his view is neither philosophically
uncontentious or tame (2000: 107) and ii) he denies that ‘p’ and ‘p is true’ express the same
proposition (2000: 92-5). The first claim seems to miss the point, as deflationism is often
regarded as radical and highly controversial. As I’ve already mentioned, a number of
contemporary deflationists also reject the second claim.
5 Although prosententialists count as deflationists and many of them are contemporaries of the
philosophers I will be considering, to the extent that they deny that ‘true’ is a predicate and that
there is a property of truth, I do no intend them to be included in my characterization of the
contemporary deflationist. If, as Mark Lance (1997), has suggested, the no-predicate, no-
28property claims are in fact not an essential part of the prosentential theory, then what I say below
should apply equally to the prosententialist.
6 Horwich (1998b: 2).
7 Field (1992: 322), attributes this view to Horwich, but also seems to accept it.
8 McGinn (2000: chapter 5); Künne (2003: 91 and 338).
9 Maudlin (2004: 30 and 68-70). Maudlin nowhere calls himself a deflationist, but his claims that
truth is a logical notion and that once we grasp the truth-function associated with it ‘there is
nothing more about it to be known, just as there is nothing more to know about conjunction once
one has the truth table ...’ (2004: 70) strongly suggest he is.
10 Hill (2002: 23). Whether Hill is right to use substitutional quantification in this context is not a
question I can tackle here.
11 Künne (2003: 338).
12 Earlier deflationists usually made no explicit claims on this point, and, even when they did,
they often hedged, as does Ayer in the last phrase of the following passage. ‘There are sentences
… in which the word “truth” seems to stand for something real; and this leads the speculative
philosopher to enquire what this “something” is. Naturally he fails to obtain a satisfactory
answer, since his question is illegitimate. For our analysis has shown that the word “truth” does
not stand for anything,in the way which such a question requires. (Ayer 1936: 89, my italics).
13 Lynch (2001a: 4) and (Vision 2004: 8) portray deflationists as denying truth has a nature and
Engel (2002: 12) says deflationists deny that truth is a genuine property.
14 Lewis (1997: 353 fn 21). Lewis makes this suggestion in the context of a discussion of the
experiential concept of revelation (I discuss this concept below). However, as we cannot
29experience the part-whole relation, we should interpret Lewis as referring to the conceptual
principle of revelation formulated above.
15 Horwich (1998b: 121).
16 My discussion of the principle of revelation has been heavily influenced by Stoljar (2006).
Needless to say, he is not to be held responsible for my application of the principle.
17 In particular, Richard (1997) points out that a non-factualist about any area of discourse won’t
accept all instances of (PT).
18 Dodd (2000: 134).
19 Fine (1994: 4-5).
20 Field maintains thatdeflationists will not suppose that the essence of truth is to be found in the
relation between truth and reference and satisfaction. Instead, the sort of compositionality Tarski
took as essential to a theory of truth is treated by Field as an optional extra (1994: 124-5). It is
unclear to me why deflationists must believe this.
21 McGinn’s (2000) discussion strongly suggests that he does assume that all logical properties
satisfy revelation. He seems to imply, that is, that all logical properties ‘aretransparent in the
sense that their nature is given in the concepts we have of them’ (2000: 84).
22 I don’t mean to take a stand on whether Kripke is right about this. Horwich (1998a) gives a
dispositional account of concept possession that he takes to avoid the worries Kripke raises.
23 Soames (2003) gives a ‘deflationary’ formulation of deflationism and explicitly holds back
from attributing any particular account of what it takes to possess the concept of truth to
deflationism.
30
24 Field (1994) and Horwich (1998b) both argue that, like truth, reference and satisfaction are
logical notions. It is an interesting, and pressing, question whether deflationism about truth
implies or even just supports this sort of deflationism about reference.
25 Wright (1992), (2001); Lynch (2001b). Wright’s position, confusingly, is called minimalism,
but since it is a form of functionalism about truth, I have simply referred to it as such here.
26 Distinguishing contemporary deflationism from the sort of primitivism about truth endorsed by
the early Moore and the early Russell is a bit harder. For the most part I think this is because it is
unclear exactly what a primitivist is committed to. If the primitivist can accept that truth is a
logical property that satisfies revelation, then primitivism is a form of deflationism according to
my account. However, Russell’s odd claim that ‘some propositions are true and some false, just
as some roses are red and some white’ (1904: 473) suggests that his version of primitivism
denies that in grasping the concept of truth we grasp what makes a proposition true. This is a
claim a contemporary deflationist would deny. For discussion of the relation between
primitivism and deflationism see Sosa (1993).
31
