The causal homogeneity of biological kinds
Michael Esfeld
University of Lausanne, Department of Philosophy &amp;
Centre romand for logic, history &amp; philosophy of science
Michael-Andreas.Esfeld@unil.ch
(forthcoming inHistory and Philosophy of the Life Sciences 27 (2005), Dec. issue)
Abstract
The aim of this paper is to show that biological kinds can be causally homogeneous, although allbiological causes are identical with configurations of physical causes. The paper considers twodifferent  strategies  to  establish  that  result:  the  first  one  relies  on  two  different  manners  ofclassification (according to function and according to composition); the other one exploits theidea of biological classifications being rather coarse-grained, whereas physical classifications arefine-grained.1.The problem
The following two claims are well founded:1) Biological kinds are homogeneous kinds: there is a homogeneous pattern of biological
effects that characterizes all and only the tokens that come under a given biological typeor kind. (I shall use the terms “type”, “kind” and “property” in a synonymous way).
2) Biological causes are identical with physical causes. That is to say, any biological token
that is part of a causal chain is identical with a configuration of physical tokens. (I shall,without further argument, take property tokens to be the relata of causal relations).
Why is there a problem in holding true the conjunction of these two claims? Recall what isknown  as  the  causal  exclusion  problem  as  set  out  by  Jaegwon  Kim  (1998,  38–47;  2005,36–45). The physical realm is causally complete. Let us call this principlecompleteness: forevery physical tokenp, insofar asp has a cause, it has a sufficient physical cause. Otherwise,physics would not be able to explain any physical tokenp (insofar asp has an explanation atall), and the physical laws would not cover any physical tokenp (insofar asp comes under alaw  at  all).  Given  the  state  of  the  art  of  physics,  completeness  is  a  well-establishedphilosophical principle (Papineau 2002, appendix).
Completeness  motivates  endorsingsupervenience,  given  that  everything  there  is  in  the
world  developed  from  a  physical  basis  during  cosmic  evolution.  In  its  most  general  form,supervenience is the claim that “any world which is aminimal physical duplicate of our worldis a duplicatesimpliciter of our world” (Jackson 1998, 12). That is to say, if applied to thelevel of fundamental physical tokens: if you imagine the entire distribution of the fundamentalphysical tokens over the whole of space-time duplicated – in the sense that you copy only thatdistribution  without  adding  anything  that  does  not  exist  in  our  world  –,  thus  creating  aminimal physical duplicate of our world, the result is thateverything that there is in our worldis duplicated.
This is a thesis of global supervenience. It pins down a way in which everything that there
is  in  the  world  depends  on  the  fundamental  physical  level.  But  it  does  not  establish  anyspecific dependence between particular physical tokens and, say, particular biological tokens.The causal homogeneity of biological kinds
2
In  order  to  get  to  specific  dependence  claims,  one  has  to  put  forward  local  supervenienceclaims – such as the thesis that if you duplicate the physical and the chemical properties of anorganism, you thereby create a double of all its properties, including its biological ones. Theproblem with such supervenience claims is obvious: the biological properties of an organismdepend not only on its physio-chemical constitution, but also on its environment. Fitness is anevident case in point. However, it seems that the salient environment is rather limited. Let ustherefore  take  for  granted  a  local  supervenience  thesis  to  the  effect  that  all  the  biologicalproperties  of  an  organism  supervene  on  its  physical  properties  as  well  as  the  physicalproperties of its environment (Rosenberg 1978).
Biological tokens are causally efficacious: every biological token is part of a causal chain,
producing some effects.  Suppose that a biological tokenb1 brings about another biologicaltokenb2. Given the supervenience of the biological on the physical, ifb1 is to causeb2, it hasto cause its supervenience base as well. Consequently,b1 can only causeb2 by bringing abouta configurationp2 of physical tokens that is a sufficient physical condition forb2. However,according to completeness – which constitutes the main reason for endorsing supervenience –,p2 has a complete physical cause, that is, another configurationp1 of physical tokens. Assumethatp1 is sufficient as a supervenience base forb1. Furthermore, by causingp2,p1 causes aswell all that supervenes onp2, that is,b2. We thus have two complete causes ofb2, namelyb1andp1,  as  well  as  two  complete  causes  ofp2,  namelyp1  andb1.  Consequently,  givensupervenience,  the  physical  causes  seem  to  exclude  –  or  at  least  to  pre-empt  –  biologicalcauses or any other higher-level causes.b1b2
 (supervenes on)
 (supervenes on)p1p2Figure  1:  the  causal  exclusion  problem.  The  arrows  of  physical  causation  are  bold,  thearrows of biological causation not bold.
There are exactly four types of solutions to this problem. One may take supervenience to
suggest  that  all  higher-level  tokens  including  biological  tokens  areepiphenomena,  thusdeleting the arrows starting inb1 in the figure above. However, in that case, one gets intoconflict with well-established results of biology: biological tokens make a difference to whatis going on in the world. One may take that making a difference to suggest that biologicaltokens  produce  effects  that  do  not  have  sufficient  physical  causes,  thus  proposing  abiophysical  interactionism  (downward  causation).  However,  in  that  case,  one  contradictssupervenience and completeness, thus provoking a conflict with well-established results ofphysics.
If  one  wishes  to  avoid  both  these  types  of  conflicts,  there  are  two  options.  The  one  is
simply to accept all the arrows of causation in the figure above, thus suggesting asystematicoverdetermination: some biological and some physical effects have, as a matter of law, twosufficient causes, a biological one and a physical one. However, since the biological causesThe causal homogeneity of biological kinds
3
bring about only what is also brought about by physical causes at the same time, there beingsufficient physical causes anyway (insofar as there are causes at all), this position leads to theconclusion that biological causes are superfluous, thus coming close to epiphenomenalism.Why should one recognize biological causes if they do not make any difference?
The remaining option isidentity. Ifb1 is identical withp1 and ifb2 is identical withp2,
there is no problem of physical causes excluding biological causes, for all biological causesare identical with physical causes. In other words, some physical causes are biological causes.The  main  argument  for  the  identity  of  causes  is  that  as  soon  as  one  conceives  biologicalcauses that are distinct from physical causes, there is a competition between the two types ofcauses, and the biological causes will inevitably lose that competition, given the completenessof  the  physical  domain.  Assuming  that  property  tokens  are  the  relata  of  causal  relations,identity of causes implies token identity: any biological token that is part of a causal chain isidentical with a configuration of physical tokens. Since we can suppose that any biologicaltoken  is  integrated  into  a  causal  chain,  we  can  say  that,  for  short,  any  biological  token  isidentical with a configuration of physical tokens.
The causal exclusion problem does not depend on any particular theory of causation – such
as, for instance, a theory of causation as the production of effects by causal powers or a theoryof  causal  processes  as  transfer  of  a  conserved  quantity.  Even  if  one  settles  for  a  minimaltheory of causation in terms of relations of counterfactual dependence between tokens of non-causal, intrinsic properties (Lewis 1973), the brief evaluation of the  situation sketched outabove does not change. In particular, even in that case, overdetermination is not a plausibleway out of the causal exclusion problem (see Sparber 2005 this volume). The second claimmentioned at the beginning of this paper thus is well founded.
However, it seems that the second claim – identity of causes – is in conflict with the first
claim,  biological  kinds  as  homogeneous  kinds  in  the  sense  that  there  is  a  homogeneouspattern of biological effects that characterizes all and only the tokens that come under a givenbiological type. The reason is that we cannot conclude from token identity to type identity,that is, the identity of biological kinds with physical kinds. Leaving molecular biology aside,biological  kinds  typically  are  functional  kinds.  Nothing  hinders  that  biological  kinds  arerealized  by  configurations  of  physical  tokens  in  such  a  way  that  each  biological  token  isidentical with a configuration of physical tokens. But, being functional kinds, biological kindscan be multiply realized. That is to say, one and the same biological typeB can be realized byconfigurations of physical tokens that do not come under a single physical typeP, but underseveral different physical typesP1,P2,P3, etc. Moreover, this fact of multiple realization isconsidered to be the main reason for endorsing the first claim. Here is one example takenfrom Elliott Sober (1993, 76–77):
In addition to explaining single events, we also want to describegeneral patterns.It is here thatthe vocabulary of supervening properties makes an irreducible contribution. … For example, theLotka-Volterra equations in ecology describe how the number of predators and the number ofprey  organisms  are  dynamically  related.  These  equations  apply  to  any  pair  of  populations  inwhich organisms in one prey upon organisms in the other. What is this relation ofpredation?Lions prey on antelopes; Venus’s-flytraps prey on flies. What does a lion have in common witha flytrap that makes both of them predators? It isn’t in virtue of any physical similarity that thesetwo  organisms  both  count  as  predators.  …  Biological  categories  allow  us  to  recognizesimilarities  between  physically  distinct  systems.  …  It  may  be  that  each  single  event  has  aThe causal homogeneity of biological kinds
4
physical  explanation,  but  this  does  not  mean  that  every  pattern  among  events  can  becharacterized in the vocabulary of physics.
If the first claim is based on the assumption that there are biological patterns (biological typesor  kinds)  that  cannot  be  seized  by  physics  and  if  these  patterns  are  characterized  by  ahomogeneous type of effects that their tokens produce, then how can the second claim be true,namely that each biological cause is identical with a physical cause? Indeed, starting from thesecond claim, Kim perceives an insoluble conflict and reaches a conclusion that amounts toeliminativism with respect to biological kinds:
…  if  the  “multiplicity”  or  “diversity”  of  realizers  means  anything,  it  must  mean  that  theserealizers are causally and nomologically diverse. Unless two realizers ofE [emergent property inthe  sense  of  higher-level  property]  show  significant  causal/nomological  diversity,  there  is  noclear reason why we should count them as two, not one. It follows then that multiply realizableproperties are ipso facto causally and nomologically heterogeneous. This is especially obviouswhen  one  reflects  on  the  causal  inheritance  principle.  All  this  points  to  the  inescapableconclusion thatE, because of its causal/nomic heterogeneity, is unfit to figure in laws, and isthereby disqualified as a useful scientific property. … The conclusion, therefore, has to be this:as a significant scientific property,E has been reduced – eliminatively. (Kim 1999, 17–18; seealso Kim 2005a, 26, 58, and Kim 2005b this volume, last but one section)
Applying this argument to biological properties in the sense of biological types or kinds, wecan sum it up in the following way:1) Each  token  of  a  biological  type  is  identical  with  the  physical  token  that  realizes  the
biological type in the given situation.
2) The  multiple  realizability  of  biological  types  implies  that  the  different  realizers  of  a
biological type are causally and nomologically heterogeneous.
3) Consequently, the biological type is not causally and nomologically homogeneous.As Kim acknowledges, this conclusion amounts to an eliminative reduction: biological kinds– indeed all higher-level, functional kinds – are eliminated as natural kinds, not figuring inlaws. However, this is not what Kim himself wants. In the concluding chapter of his latestbook, he clearly states that what he aims at is conservative reduction, not elimination (Kim2005a, 159–160). The whole point of the argument for biological causes being identical withphysical causes is that accepting that identity is the only way to rescue biological causation.However,  that  argument  would  lose  its  point  if  its  consequence  were  that  there  are  nohomogeneous biological kinds. In the following, I shall sketch out two strategies that one canpursue  to  avoid  this  eliminativist  conclusion  –  and  thus  hold  on  to  both  the  claim  ofhomogeneous  biological  kinds  and  the  claim  of  biological  causes  being  identical  withphysical causes.2.Two different classifications
What  is  the  reason  for  the  multiple  realization  of  biological  types?  Apart  from  molecularbiology, biological types are classified according to their function in the sense of a causal role(pattern of salient characteristic causes and effects). Physical types, by contrast, are classifiedaccording to mereological composition. Classification according to function can differ fromclassification according to composition in the sense that configurations that are composed indifferent manners of physical tokens can all exhibit the same salient higher-level effects. ThatThe causal homogeneity of biological kinds
5
is  why  biological  types  can  be  multiply  realized  by  configurations  of  physical  tokens  thatcome under different physical types due to their different physical composition.
Against this background, we can counter the crucial claim in Kim’s argument – namely that
(2)  the  multiple  realizability  of  biological  types  implies  that  the  different  realizers  of  abiological type are causally and nomologically heterogeneous – in the following way:
1) It is sufficient for the configurations of physical tokens that realize a biological typeB to
be  diverse  that  they  are  composed  in  diverse  manners  of  physical  tokens.  In  other  words,multiple composition is sufficient for the realizers of a biological type to be diverse, becausethe realizers are distinguished by their composition.
2) The causal inheritance principle is to say that any token of a biological typeB, being
identical with a configuration of physical tokens, inherits its causal power (that is, its capacityto produce specific effects) from that configuration; for the causal power of that configurationis – or at least includes – the causal power that defines the biological typeB. That is why theconfiguration  in  question  is  a  realizer  ofB.  The  configuration,  in  turn,  inherits  its  causalpower from – in the last resort – the causal powers of the tokens of fundamental physicalproperties of which it is composed. The causal power of the configuration supervenes on thecausal powers of these tokens.
3)  The  causal  inheritance  principle  permits  that  different  manners  of  composition  by
fundamental physical tokens lead to configurations that produce higher-level effects of thesame  salient  type.  No  two  configurations  that  are  composed  in  two  different  ways  byfundamental physical tokens produce exactly the same effects. Kim’s argument in the citationat the end of the last section is not the trivial point that there is some difference in the effectsthat  different  realizers  have,  but  that  the  different  realizers  “show  significantcausal/nomological diversity”. The counter-argument is that the configurations that realize agiven  biological  type,  despite  being  composed  in  different  manners,  can  have  the  samepertinent higher-level effects: (a) they all produce effects of the same type, (b) for each ofthese configurations, these are the significant effects that the configuration produces and (c)only these configurations bring about the effects in question (compare Antony 1999, 19–22,Clapp  2001,  126–132,  as  well  as  what  Shoemaker  2001,  in  particular  79,  calls  forward-looking causal features that are common to all and only the realizers of a given functionaltype). Consider selection: biological properties of organisms are selected for the effects theirinstances have. Selection is blind to composition. That is why what is relevant to biology isfunction instead of composition (Papineau 1993, chapter 2).
In sum, based on the principle of different classifications, there is a way to match the two
claims mentioned at the beginning of this paper. Biological causes are identical with physicalcauses  such  that  any  biological  token  is  identical  with  a  configuration  of  physical  tokens.Nothing hinders that configurations that are composed in different manners of physical tokensproduce the same salient biological effects – notably effects that are salient for selection in agiven environment. Therefore, biological types are causally and nomologically homogeneous;they are heterogeneous only with respect to their physical composition.
This  argument  vindicates  causally  homogeneous  biological  types  despite  multiple
realization  and  the  causal  exclusion  argument  for  token  identity.  Nonetheless,  it  isquestionable  whether  this  is  an  argument  for  the  irreducibility  of  biological  theories  totheories  of  chemistry  or  physics.  As  quoted  in  the  last  section,  Sober  claims  that  thevocabulary of supervening properties makes an irreducible contribution to the description ofThe causal homogeneity of biological kinds
6
general patterns. However, if we take global supervenience for granted, then any similaritythat there is between biological tokens also supervenes on the physical level. In other words,if there is a pattern of similarity among biological tokens that justifies regarding these tokensas belonging to a homogeneous biological type, then there is a supervenience base for thatpattern. Consequently, whatever several biological tokens may have in common, this is fixedby what there is on the physical level. But in this case, it seems that what constitutes thesepatterns  –  and  thus  what  makes  several  biological  tokens  similar  –  can  in  principle  beaccounted  for  in  a  physical  vocabulary  (even  if,  in  practice,  our  physics  may  not  be  in  aposition to put forward such an account). Hence, in short, the idea of two different manners ofclassification is sufficient to vindicate the two claims set out at the beginning of this paper,but this idea – and these two claims – do not imply the irreducibility of biological theories.3.Homogeneous classifications – coarse-grained and fine-grained
The idea of two different manners of classification pursued in the preceding section is basedon  the  assumption  that  physics  –  and  chemistry  up  to  molecular  biology  –  classifiesconfigurations of physical tokens according to composition, whereas biology classifies themaccording to function. Kim’s argument ending up with eliminative reduction, by contrast, isbased on a causal theory of properties according to which properties are characterized by theeffects that their instances characteristically have (Shoemaker 1980). Therefore, it is claimedthat if there are different types of realizers of a functional, biological type, there are differenttypes of effects and, consequently, no homogeneous biological type. The weak point of thisargument, which was exploited in the last section, is that Kim does not pay heed to the factthat any functional biological type can only be realized by aconfiguration of physical tokensinstead  of  a  single  physical  token  –  a  configuration  that  can  be  classified  according  tocomposition as well as according to function.
Nonetheless, there is a point about the causal theory of properties. One can claim with good
reason  that  there  is  in  fact  no  neat  distinction  between  the  two  manners  of  classificationevoked in the last section. In particular, what counts as a realizer configuration with respect toa higher-level kind may itself be an instance of a functional kind with respect to a lower level,that is, being itself realized by a configuration of lower-level tokens. To take a clear example,assume  that  mental  kinds  are  functional  kinds  that  are  realized  by  configurations  ofneurobiological  tokens.  However,  the  kinds  under  which  neurobiological  tokens  come  arethemselves functional kinds. In the same manner, genes are functional types that are realizedby configurations of molecular tokens. One can argue that the molecular kinds in question arethemselves functional kinds with respect to more basic chemical or physical kinds (Rosenberg1994, 24–25).
In this way we get in the end to the idea that there are functional kinds all the way down.
There is no need to call into question the assumption that there is a basic level of nature. Onecan easily define a basic level as the level of properties that need nothing more than a space-time point in order to be instantiated (compare David Lewis’ thesis of Humean superveniencein  Lewis  1986,  IX-X).  There  is  nothing  smaller  than  a  space-time  point.  As  regards  thefundamental physical kinds, it is undisputed that we can know them only via the relationstheir instances enter into (see, for example, Jackson 1998, 23). What is more, there are goodphysical  as  well  as  metaphysical  arguments  for  maintaining  that  the  fundamental  physicalproperties are themselves relational properties, consisting in relations between one space-timeThe causal homogeneity of biological kinds
7
point  and  other  space-time  points.  That  is  what  the  position  known  as  structural  realismamounts to (e.g. French &amp; Ladyman 2003 and Esfeld &amp; Lam 2005).
This view does not imply that all fundamental properties are causal-functional properties,
for there are other relational properties than causal ones. It may even be the case that causalproperties do not belong to the fundamental level (see Lam 2005 this volume as regards thephysical foundations of causation). Be that as it may, in any case, one can regard all relationalproperties as functional properties based on a wide notion of functional properties that is nottied to the concept of a causal role, but to the idea of a property being defined by its positionin  a  network  with  other  properties,  that  is,  its  relations  to  other  properties.  In  this  case,however, there is no question any more of functional properties being second-order propertiesthat have to be realized by configurations of tokens of first-order properties. There are justtokens  of  functional-relational  properties.  Some  configurations  of  tokens  of  certain  lower-level functional-relational kinds are tokens of higher-level functional-relational kinds.
Consequently,  there  are  not  two  different  manners  of  classification.  All  classifications
proceed in a functional-relational manner. The classifications on the fundamental level arevery  fine-grained,  the  classifications  on  higher-levels  are  more  and  more  coarse-grained,abstracting from details that are not relevant to the salient effects produced on higher levels.In this perspective, the idea of there being two different kinds of classification is based on awrong-headed presupposition, namely the view that the fundamental physical properties areintrinsic  ones,  giving  rise  to  two  different  manners  of  classification  –  according  tocomposition  by  tokens  of  intrinsic  properties  and  according  to  the  function  that  someconfigurations of tokens of intrinsic properties perform.
Stephen Yablo (1992, 250–257) proposes the following interpretation of the standard view
of higher-level kinds being functional kinds whose instances are multiply realized: higher-level functional kinds are determinable kinds, whereas their lower-level realizers are moredeterminate kinds. Yablo thus integrates the talk of functional roles and their realizers into thefamiliar  talk  of  –  determinable  –  genus  and  –  more  determinate  –  species.  For  instance,“animal” is a determinable kind, “mammal” a more determinate kind, and “cat” an even moredeterminate  kind.  In  the  same  way,  following  Yablo,  “gene”  is  a  determinable  kind,  and“certain sequence of bases in the DNA” a more determinate kind.
Yablo  (1992,  273–280)  sets  out  the  proposition  of  functional  kinds  being  determinable
kinds and their realizers coming under determinate kinds in order to develop a solution to thecausal exclusion problem in terms of, in short, causes being proportional to their effects (seeHarbecke  2005  this  volume).  However,  in  the  case  of  higher-level  causation,  such  as  abiological token producing an effect, his proposal amounts to either overdetermination – incase  there  is  a  proportional  biological  and  a  proportional  physical  cause  of  the  effect  inquestion – or interactionism, rejecting completeness, in case there is only a biological and nota  physical  proportional  cause  for  the  effect  in  question.  To  take  an  example  within  theframework  of  Yablo’s  discussion,  mental  causation,  if  my  right  arm  goes  up  this  noonbecause I want to raise it, the effect of my right arm going up is either overdetermined, havinga  sufficient  mental  and  a  sufficient  physical  (neurobiological)  cause,  or  completeness  isviolated, if that effect has only a mental cause.
The reason for that impasse is that Yablo conceives determinables and their determinates as
really  existing,  not-identical  properties,  not-identical  types  as  well  as  not-identical  tokens(Yablo  1992,  266–271;  see  Gillet  &amp;  Rives  2005,  part  3,  for  a  criticism  of  this  position).The causal homogeneity of biological kinds
8
However, whereas it is correct to maintain that, for example, a gene of the same type couldhave been there, even if there had been another sequence of bases in the DNA, one can arguethat there is no point in claiming that the same token gene could have been there at the sameinstant, even if there had been another sequence of bases in the DNA at that time (see Sparber2005 this volume) – in the same way as it would be absurd to claim that the same blue tokencould have been there, even if there had been another shade of blue (say aquamarine insteadof cobalt). In those cases, there would have been another token, albeit of the same type – thatis, another token gene or another token blue. Hence, pace Yablo, the argument for regardinghigher-level causes, such as biological ones, as being identical with physical causes stands.Consequently, higher-level tokens, such as biological ones, are identical with configurationsof physical tokens.
Token identity implies that it is the same individual that makes true a physical description
as  well  as  higher-level  descriptions  such  as  a  biological  one.  In  short,  there  are  differentconcepts  and  different  degrees  of  abstract  descriptions  –  from  a  detailed,  determinatedescription in terms of fundamental physics to more determinable descriptions in a chemical,a molecular biological, or a genetic vocabulary, etc. – but all these descriptions refer to thesame individuals and have the same truthmakers (compare Heil 2003, chapters 2 to 7).
Leaving  aside  Yablo’s  ontology,  we  can  employ  his  suggestion  about  functional  kinds
being determinable kinds to spell out the idea of a homogeneous classification – and, paceKim,  we  get  homogeneous  biological  kinds,  this  time  without  relying  on  two  differentmanners of classification. A detailed description in terms of fundamental physical concepts isa  very  determinate  description,  higher-level  descriptions  are  less  and  less  determinate.Nonetheless, they refer to homogeneous patterns of characteristic effects, and their conceptsfigure  in  laws.  Determinable  kinds  are  homogeneous  kinds,  being  defined  notably  by  ahomogeneous  pattern  of  effects.  They  are  just  less  determinate  than  their  determinates.  Agenus is something homogeneous (as the word implies), as are its species. For instance, thegenus “mammal” is characterized by the effect of giving birth to live babies and feeding themon milk from the breast – that is the salient feature that all and only the tokens of mammalshave in common.
If the relation between functional properties and their realizers is the one of determinables
to their determinates, there is nothing particular about multiple realization. The same gene isrealized  by  different  chunks  of  DNA  as  mammals  are  realized  by  cats,  dogs,  whales,elephants, etc. – if one wishes to employ the term “realization” in that case. Of course, whatone says about a gene is true not only of a chunk of DNA of a particular composition, but alsotrue  of  chunks  of  DNA  of  other  composition  –  in  the  same  way  as  what  one  says  aboutmammals is true not only of cats, but also of whales. However, this triviality does not hindertheory reduction.
As is clear since the improvement by Hooker (1981) on the account of theory reduction of
Nagel (1961, chapter 11), in order to reduce a higher-level theory to a lower-level theory, it isnecessary  to  prepare  the  lower-level  theory  for  reduction:  one  has  to  introduce  within  thedetailed  descriptions  of  the  lower-level  theory  more  abstract  concepts  tailor-made  for  thespecific  configurations  of  lower-level  tokens  to  which  a  higher-level  theory  refers  (see  inparticular Hooker 1981, 49 and 498–508). If all properties are functional-relational properties,there  is  no  principled  problem  for  introducing  such  concepts  in  a  way  that  is  suitable  fortheory reduction (see Sachse 2005 this volume). In sum, in whatever way one cuts the dough,The causal homogeneity of biological kinds
9
one  gets  to  reduction,  but  to  conservative  reduction  –  reduction  without  elimination,respecting both the identity of biological causes and tokens with configurations of physicalcauses and tokens as well as the homogeneity of biological kinds, characterized each by ahomogeneous pattern of salient effects that their instances produce.References
Antony, L. M., 1999, “Multiple realizability, projectibility, and the reality of mental properties”,PhilosophicalTopics, 26: 1–24.
Clapp, L., 2001, “Disjunctive properties: multiple realizations”,Journal of Philosophy, 98: 111–136.
Esfeld, M. &amp; Lam, V., 2005, “Moderate structural realism about space-time”, Manuscript, submitted.
French,  S.  &amp;  Ladyman,  J.,  2003,  “Remodelling  structural  realism:  Quantum  physics  and  the  metaphysics  of
structure”,Synthese, 136: 31–56.
Gillet,  C.  &amp;  Rives,  B.,  2005,  “The  non-existence  of  determinables:  or,  a  world  of  absolute  determinates  as
default hypothesis”,Noûs, 39: 483–504.
Harbecke, J., 2005, “A realist approach to biological events”, this volume.
Heil, J., 2003,From an ontological point of view, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hooker, C. A., 1981, “Towards a general theory of reduction. Part I: Historical and scientific setting. Part II:
Identity in reduction. Part III: Cross-categorial reduction”,Dialogue, 20: 38–60, 201–236, 496–529.
Jackson, F., 1998,From metaphysics to ethics. A defence of conceptual analysis, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Kim, J., 1998,Mind in a physical world. An essay on the mind-body problem and mental causation, Cambridge
(Massachusetts): MIT Press.
Kim, J., 1999, “Making sense of emergence”,Philosophical Studies, 95: 3–36.
Kim, J., 2005a,Physicalism, or something near enough, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kim, J., 2005b, “Laws, causation, and explanation in the special sciences”, this volume.
Lam, V., 2005, “Causation and space-time”, this volume.
Lewis, D., 1973, “Causation”.Journal of Philosophy,70: 556–567.
Lewis, D., 1986,Philosophical papers. Volume 2, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nagel, E., 1961,The structure of science. Problems in the logic of scientific explanation, London: Routledge.
Papineau, D., 1993,Philosophical naturalism, Oxford: Blackwell.
Papineau, D., 2002,Thinking about consciousness, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rosenberg, A., 1978, “The supervenience of biological concepts”,Philosophy of Science, 45: 368–386.
Rosenberg, A., 1994,Instrumental biology or the disunity of science, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sachse, C., 2005, “Reduction of biological properties by means of functional sub-types”, this volume.
Shoemaker, S., 1980, “Causality and properties”. In: van Inwagen, P. (ed.),Time and cause, Dordrecht: Reidel,
109–135. Reprinted in Shoemaker, S., 1984,Identity, cause, and mind. Philosophical essays, Cambridge:Cambridge University Press, essay 10.
Shoemaker, S., 2001, “Realization and mental causation”. In: Gillet, C. &amp; Loewer, B. (eds.),Physicalism and itsdiscontents, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 74–98.
Sober, E., 1993,Philosophy of biology, Boulder: Westview Press.
Sparber, G., 2005, “Counterfactual overdetermination vs. the causal exclusion problem”, this volume.
Yablo, S., 1992, “Mental causation”,Philosophical Review, 101: 245–280.
