Brooks (1991)  Intelligence without RepresentationWorking Draft – Comments Welcome!  Last Updated 2004.09.21By Justin C. Fisher – University of Arizona, Department of PhilosophyHomepage:http://www.u.arizona.edu/~jcfisher  E-mail:jcfisher@u.arizona.eduEmotions as Modes of CognitionContents.
I.   Introduction.II.  Ratiocination vs. Cognition.III. Emotions as Modes of Cognition.IV. Four Competing Proposals.V.  The Impact of Emotion on Cognition.VI. The Kinematics of Ratiocination.VII. Competing Cognitive Theories.VIII. Why think Emotions are Beliefs?IX.  The Intentionality of Emotions.X.   The Kinematics of Emotions.XI. A Unified Account of the Emotions.XII. The Rationality of Emotions.I. Introduction.
Common parlance often depicts emotions as demons which take up residence within asubject and which alter the ways in which she thinks and acts.  For example, wecommonly talk of subjects being possessed byrage, being haunted bygrief, or beinginbad spirits.  We say that emotionscreep up on us andgrab a hold of us and that they thenrefuse to let us go or evenrefuse to be dispelled.  Long lasting negative emotions are saidto beemotional baggageordemonsthat we carry around with us.  In the case of morepositive emotions, we say that a feeling of happinessdescends upona subject, that lovewells up within a subject, that a subjectbecomes suffused witha spiritof awe or of joy,or, more generally, that a subject isin good spirits.
There are several obvious drawbacks to the metaphor of emotions as demons.  We thinkof demons as spooky things that enter an agent from outside, while our best empiricalevidence suggests that emotions instead arise from natural mechanisms that play anintegral role within a healthy animal’s full cognitive system.  We often think of demonsas malevolent and destructive, while we accept that at least some emotions play a verypositive, constructive role in our lives.  But despite these drawbacks, I think that there ismuch to be gained by attending to this metaphor as we attempt to develop a good theoryof the emotions.
I will propose that the central feature of emotions is the fact that they normally modulatethe ways in which processes of ordinary epistemic and practical reasoning – processeswhich I will call ‘ratiocination’ – are performed.  On this proposal, emotions really arelike demons that possess us and alter the mode of our cognition.  Like the hypotheticalFisher 2
demons, emotions draw our attention to certain things; they set priorities for us (whetherwe would ratiocinatively choose those priorities or not); and they introduce compellingurges in us to do various things.  The goal of this paper is to spell out this ‘Modes ofCognition proposal’ and to give reasons for thinking that it is preferable to alternativeunderstandings of the emotions.
I will compare my ‘Modes of Cognition’ proposal to three existing proposals about thenature of emotions.  The central claims of the four competing proposals are as follows.
1.Phenomenal Feels Proposal:  Emotions are certain sorts of phenomenal feelings.
2.Somatic Proposal:  Emotions are (or essentially involve) clusters of
physiological and behavioral changes that tend to be triggered together.
3.Purely Ratiocinative Proposal:  Emotions are judgments which play a belief-like
role in ordinary ratiocination.
4.Modes of Cognition Proposal:  Emotions alter a subject’s mode of cognition and
especially her mode of ratiocination.
I will argue that the Phenomenal Feels and Somatic proposals both fail to take intoaccount the important effects that emotions have on our cognition.  Emotions don’t justfeel certain ways and/or make our bodies do certain things; they also impact upon whatwe think and how we think.  To account for the centrally important effects that emotionshave on cognition, one must either depict emotions as ordinary players in ratiocination(the Purely Ratiocinative proposal) or depict emotions as being otherwise capable ofinfluencing ratiocination (the Modes of Cognition proposal).
I will then argue that there is quite strong reason to favor the Modes of Cognitionproposal over the Purely Ratiocinative proposal.  This discussion will raise importantquestions about the sense in which emotions are ‘intentional’ and ‘rational’, aboutwhether and how emotions may be changed by socialization, and about whether onemight hope for a unified account of the emotions which accommodates both immediateresponses in the heat of the moment and long-term modulations in how one thinks aboutan object.  I will argue that the Modes of Cognition proposal gives quite satisfactoryanswers to all these questions.II. Ratiocination vs. Cognition
Now is a good point for several brief notes on terminology.
I will use the term ‘ratiocination’ to refer just to our introspectable deliberative processesof epistemic and practical reasoning.  Hence, the paradigmatic ratiocinative elements arebeliefs and instrumental desires.  I will use the term ‘cognitive’ in the broad sense that itis used in ‘cognitive science’, as a way of capturing many (or perhaps all) of theinteresting sorts of information processing that animals do in order to get around in theworld.  On this usage, everything that is ratiocinative is cognitive, but there are many
 link to page 3  link to page 3Fisher 3
cognitive elements (e.g., elements of subconscious or non-deliberative informationprocessing) which are not ratiocinative.1
Using this terminology, my view is that emotions arecognitive, that they have essential(normal) effects on one’s mode ofratiocination, but that they arenot, strictly speaking,ratiocinative, because they do not have the sort of normal role in cognition that ispossessed by the paradigmatic players (e.g., beliefs or instrumental desires) inratiocinative processes.III.  Emotions as Modes of Cognition.
With this terminology in mind, let us now attempt to extract several important germs oftruth from the demons-metaphor, even aswe back away from its spookier aspects.2
First, there is the idea that, like demons, emotions areexternal toratiocination.  This ideamay be supported by reflection upon one’s own emotional experiences.  It certainlyseemsto be the case that one does not come to have an emotion in the same way that oneforms a belief or instrumental desire.  Further, it certainly seems thatjustarriving at theratiocinative conclusion that an emotion is out of place is often not enough to get thatemotion to go away.  For example, when I stand in high places, myratiocinativeprocesses can (seemingly) be univocally confident about my complete safety, and yet mydizzying fear of falling may persist unabated, and prevent me from thinking about otherthings in the comfortable way that I normally can.
These intuitive observations suggest that emotions do not have the role in cognition thatis characteristic of the paradagmatic players in ordinary ratiocination.  Instead, theintuitive conclusion is, emotions must be something external to the processes of ordinaryratiocination, and thecreation anddissolution of emotions must be only contingentlylinked to ratiocinative events.  At least from the perspective of ratiocination, emotionsmight as well be demons which come from outside to possess a cognitive system andalter the way in which it functions.
I think reflection on everyday experience strongly supports this intuitive conclusion.However, we will see below that there are people who do reject it, and we will considertheir arguments in detail.  For now, allow me to continue with an intuitive presentation ofmy positive view.
1 My broad construal of ‘cognitive’ may be contrasted against the much narrower sense of ‘cognitive’which often arises in meta-ethics, and which is intended to apply only to those representations that aretruth-evaluable and belief-like.  This meta-ethical use of the term ‘cognitive’ is better tracked by my term‘ratiocinative’ than by my use of the term ‘cognitive’.  Similarly, Jesse Prinz’s (2004, pp. 41-9) preferreduse of the term ‘cognitive’ falls more closely in line with my use of the term ‘ratiocinative’ than it doeswith my term ‘cognitive’.  However, in briefly mentioning the potential defensibility of a view like mine,Prinz (2004, pg 10) appears to grant my broader usage of ‘cognitive’.
2 I will cite two germs of truth in the following paragraphs.  A third will come to light in the discussionbelow, where I will note that the demons-hypothesis offers a conceptual guide towards understanding howone might give a unified account of both those emotions which last no longer than the heat of the moment,and those ‘cooler’ emotions that may last for long periods of time.
 link to page 4Fisher 4
The demons-hypothesis also embodies a second important germ of truth, namely thathaving an emotion alters the manner in which a subject’s cognition proceeds.  Like thehypothetical demons, emotions draw our attention to certain things; they set priorities forus; and they introduce compelling urges in us to do various things.  These examples givea taste for the many ways in which having an emotion might alter one’s mode ofcognition.  As we consider the various modulating effects that emotion might have onother cognitive processes, it will be good to turn to existing work that is related to myproposal.
A fair number of existing proposals bear at least some relation to my own, includingOatley and Johnson-Laird (1987), de Sousa (1987), Frank (1988), Wright, Sloman, &amp;Beaudoin (1996), Wollheim (1999), and Sizer (2000).  However, for the present goal ofcataloging the sorts of modulating effects that emotions might have, I will concentrate onthe work of leading evolutionary psychologists Leda Cosmides and John Tooby.Cosmiudes, Tooby, and other evolutionary psychologists have developed a number ofvery good and very interesting ideas about the emotions – ideas that are well worth thetrouble of extracting from the controversial baggage that so often comes bundled with theproducts of this research program.3  The following is a greatly abbreviated and charitablymodified version of a quite comprehensive list of effects that Cosmides and Tooby(2000) think emotions probably have:Goals: Emotions may influence what goals one sets for oneself, or the ways inwhich one goes about selecting goals from available alternatives.Motivational priorities: Emotions may influence the relative priorities that aregiven to various goals, and they may influence the ways in which apparentprogress or failures to progress toward a goal might affect one’s inclination tocontinue working towards that goal.Information-gathering motivations: Emotions may affect what one is curiousabout, what one finds interesting, or what one is obsessed with discovering.Attention: Emotions may affect what sorts of things one attends to, both inperception and in ratiocination.Perceptual mechanisms: Emotions may prompt perceptual systems to beespecially sensitive to certain sorts of cues.
3 Particularly questionable is the general view that the human cognitive system consists of extremely manyinnate modules each of which is geared towards its own very specific purpose in a way that was quiteideally adapted to the social and environmental conditions that humans faced some number of thousands ofyears ago.  Rather than committing ourselves to this constellation of controversial claims we should try todevelop a view of the emotions that is open to alternatives.  It may turn out that there are relatively fewneatly identifiable modules in the human cognitive system.  It may turn out that the human cognitivesystem is quite plastic and perhaps also significantly culturally influenced.  Hence, it may turn out thatthere are important cognitive differences across people, across times, and across cultures, and it may turnout that human cognitive systems are reasonably well adapted to contemporary circumstances andcontemporary cultures rather than being, as it were, stuck in the stone age.
 link to page 5Fisher 5Imposed conceptual frameworks: Emotions may prompt one to tend to construethe world in terms of particular concepts or categories.Specialized inference and decision-making: Emotions may influence which sortsof reasoning schemes are likely to be applied in thinking about a problem.  Someof these influences might be viewed as alterations of parameters or weightings inmulti-purpose reasoning schemes.  E.g., fear may license quick-and-dirtyinferences which would be inappropriate ‘hasty generalizations’ at other times.Memory:  Emotions may affect which sorts of memories are potentiated for quickretrieval (e.g., those relevant to the thing that the emotion is about).  Emotionsmay also affect the ways in which present events will be stored in memory.Learning: Emotions may alter what someone learns from stimuli.  This may be inpart due to the allocation of attention, motivation, or situation-specific learningalgorithms.  Highly specialized learning mechanisms might also be activated,such as those that control food aversions (Garcia, 1990), predator learning(Mineka &amp; Cooke, 1985), or fear conditioning (LeDoux, 1995).Imagination:Emotions may affect what one imagines or the ways in which oneimagines.  For example, fear may make it relatively easy to imagine disastrousscenarios involving the object of fear, and relatively hard to imagine less pressingmatters.Energy level and effort allocation: Emotions may regulate one’s overallmetabolic budget, as well as specific allocations to various processes andfacilitation or inhibition of specific activities. The effort that it takes to performgiven tasks will shift accordingly, with things being easier or more effortfuldepending on how appropriate they are to the situation reflected by the emotion(Tooby &amp; Cosmides, 1990a).Physiology/Behavior: An emotion may produce or influence the production ofphysiological or behavioral effects in a way that (at least ideally) is likely to bebeneficial in times in which that emotion is triggered.  In particular, many (but notall) emotions evoke expressions which may easily be recognized by conspecifics.
It may be worth noting that most of these potential modulating effects of emotions arepurely cognitive (in the broad sense indicated above).  Only the last two entries involvenon-cognitive elements like (mere) behaviors or (mere) physiological changes.4  But,even in these cases, it is sometimes plausible to construe emotions as having these effectsby modulating the flow of information from cognitive processes to these non-cognitiveresults.  For example, fear may produce tentative, cautious behavior by altering the(cognitive) thresholds that impulses to behave must exceed before producing behavior.Hence, even a good portion of these latter two entries might be assimilating in a modes-
4 The ‘mere’s are there because, most (or all?)cognitivechanges are alsophysiological changes, and,depending upon what one means by ‘behavioral’ they may also bebehavioral.
 link to page 6Fisher 6
of-cognition model.  This will be in strong contrast to the view (discussed in the nextsection) that what is essential to emotions is their direct effects on (mere) physiology andbehavior, rather than their effects on cognition.
We have just seen a long list of potential modulating effects that emotions may have onother cognitive processes.  Metaphorically, this as a demon’s handbook outlining themany potential ways different emotional demons might affect a cognitive system.
Quite plausibly, different types of emotions will have different clusters of characteristiccauses and effects.  For example, the various cases that we commonly label as ‘fear’plausibly may be triggered by more-or-less reliable indicators of potential danger, andplausibly may involve modulations in all these categories in ways that are geared towardsmaking an agent attend to and avoid a potential danger.  Cases to which we commonlygive other labels (like ‘love’, ‘happiness’ or ‘jealousy’) likely involve differentcharacteristic clusters of triggers and of modulations on cognitive processes.
Hence, I suggest that emotions may be usefully categorized in terms of the clusters ofthings that will trigger them and the clusters of modulating effects that they have uponother cognitive processes.  In suggesting this, I am not committing myself to the idea that,for something to count as an instance of a particular type of emotion (say, as an instanceof ‘fear’) that it must display every single property in the cluster that is characteristic ofthat emotion.  Instead, the categorization should demand that an instance of a categorydisplay only most (perhaps aweightedmost) of the features in the cluster that ischaracteristic of that category. Like most categorizations in the life sciences thesecategorizations must be inherently fuzzy, and they must admit of a (hopefully not verylarge) number of borderline cases.
If pressed further, I would say that the categorization should not be made on the basis ofactualtriggers and effects, but instead on the basis of whatwould cause or be caused bythat emotion,if the cognitive systemwere operating in accordance with the principles thatdescribe normal successful cognition in that kind of system.  At some risk of confusion, Iwill abbreviate this idea by saying that what is essential to fear is itsnormalrole insuccessful cognition, or what characteristic triggers and modulating effects itnormallyhas.  This move allows that there may be pathological cases of an emotion which, in fact,are triggered in uncharacteristic ways (e.g., phobias), or which, in fact, bring aboutuncharacteristic effects.  This general sort of move is advocated by teleofunctionalists(e.g., Millikan 1984) and by others (e.g., Lewis 1983).
In summary, my modes of cognition proposal holds that the central and most essentialfeature of emotions is that they normally have various modulating effects on cognitiveprocesses, and that emotions may usefully be categorized in terms of the particularclusters of things that normally trigger them and of the modulating effects that theynormally produce.5  This view retains the central insights of the demon metaphor – that
5 Below, I will suggest that there may also be useful ways of categorizing emotions in terms of theirintentional content.Fisher 7
emotions are external to ratiocination but significantly impact upon ratiocination andother cognitive processes – while at the same time being empirically very plausible.IV. Four Competing Proposals
At this point, it will be useful to contrast the view that I have just proposed against threeother proposed views of the emotions.
First, there is the intuitive view that an emotion is a certain sort of phenomenal feelingthat one might have.  This view holds that what is essential to anger is just what it feelslike to be angry.  As a matter of contingent fact, it may be that anger often is caused incertain ways and often brings about certain cognitive effects, but, according to this view,these contingent facts are not in any (direct) way responsible for anger being an emotion,nor for its being the emotion that it is.  This ‘phenomenal feels’ proposal is intuitivelyattractive.  Jaak Pansepp (2000) reports that most subjects (interestingly with theexception of philosophy majors) rank feelings over thoughts and changes in theautonomic nervous system as being more important to emotions.  This proposal was alsoinfluentially advocated by William James (1884) and Karl Lange (1885), who held thatemotions were the experiences of various changes in one’s body.
James and Lange were also committed to a second proposal, namely that it is essential toemotions that they characteristically involve a certain cluster of physiological and/orbehavioral changes.  This ‘somatic’ proposal is often supported by noting research,tracing back to Darwin and more recently pursued especially by Paul Ekman, suggestingthat there is a small number of such clusters of emotional displays – or ‘affect programs’– each of which is quite universal across human cultures.  The somatic proposal allowsthat, as a matter of contingent fact, anger may typically be caused in certain ways, maytypically have a certain phenomenal feel, and may bring about various cognitive effects.But, according to (a pure version of) this proposal, these contingent facts are not in anyway responsible for the fact that anger is an emotion, nor for its being the emotion that itis.  Versions of the somatic proposal were defended by behaviorists (e.g., Watson 1919,Ryle 1949, Skinner 1962), and more recently by Griffiths (1997) and Rolls (1999).  Onemay also interpret Jesse Prinz’s (2004) ‘embodied appraisal’ account of emotions as an(impure) form of a somatic proposal, as it holds that (perceptual registerings of) bodilystates are essential to emotions.
Third, there is the view that what is essential to emotions is their having (or their beingcaused by things that have) some particular sort of belief-like or desire-like role aselements in ratiocination.  This ‘purely ratiocinative’ proposal grants that emotions mayoften have certain phenomenal feels, certain physiological effects, and even certaineffects on non-ratiocinative cognition, but it holds that these accidental features are notdirectly responsible for these emotions’ being the emotions that they are.
The purely ratiocinative proposal may be traced back to Aristotle and the stoics.  Itsrecent defenders have included Robert Solomon (1999) and Martha Nussbaum (2001),who suggest that emotions are belief-like judgments regarding the value of an objectwithin the scheme of things that one cares about.Fisher 8
This proposal also encompasses the predominate understanding of emotions amongpsychologistswhich depicts emotions as essentially beingproducts of certain sorts ofratiocinative appraisals, in much the way that a sunburn is essentially the product of acertain sort of process involving the sun (Gordon 1987).  Versions of this view aredefended by Arnold (1960), Lazarus (1991), among many others.  Like the view (moreoften defended by philosophers) that emotionsarea certain sort of belief, the view (moreoften defended by psychologists) that emotionsare essentially caused by a certain sort ofbelief is committed to saying that the presence, absence, and essential consequences ofemotions are closely linked to the kinematics of ordinary ratiocination.  In what follows, Iwill concentrate upon the philosophers’ formulation of the purely ratiocinative view (as athesis about the identity of emotions), but most of what I say about it may be adapted,mutatis mutandis, to the psychologist’s version (as a thesis about the essential causalorigins of emotions).
In summary, the central claims of the four proposals are as follows.
1.Phenomenal Feels Proposal:  Emotions are certain sorts of phenomenal feelings.
2.Somatic Proposal:  Emotions are (or essentially involve) clusters of
physiological and behavioral changes that tend to be triggered together.
3.Purely Ratiocinative Proposal:  Emotions are judgments which play a belief-like
role in ordinary ratiocination.
4.Modes of Cognition Proposal(briefly sketched above):  Emotions alter a
subject’s mode of cognition and especially her mode of ratiocination.
These four proposals amount to four sorts of ingredients that a theorist might take to playan essential role in an account of the emotions.  There has been an understandabletemptation among many theorists to choose just one of these ingredients and to attempt tospell out a general account of the emotions just in terms of it.
However, one needn’t be committed to saying thatjust oneof these four ingredients is theonly essential one.  For example, we have seen that James and Lange held that it wasessential to emotions both that they involve various somatic changesand that theyinvolve the phenomenal experience of those changes.  Alternatively, one might followAristotle and hold that an emotion is essentially a belief that has both an appropriatecontentand an approporiate phenomenal feel.  For a nice survey of various hybrid viewssee Prinz (2004, Chap 1).
An alternative way of combining different sorts of ingredients would be to say that thereare several distinct classes of phenomena which have been lumped together under theheading ‘emotion’, and that different ingredients are required to account for each class.For example, Paul Griffiths (1997) suggests that one important class of emotionalphenomena is well accounted for by the Somatic proposal, while a distinct class ofphenomena which have also been labeled as ‘emotions’ might be reasonably well
 link to page 9  link to page 9Fisher 9
accounted for by some form of the Modes of Cognition proposal.6  Insofar as both ofthese classes deserve the label ‘emotions’ (a point about which Griffiths wavers),Griffiths’ suggestion is that a full bipartite account of the emotions must make quiteseparate references to physiological and to ratiocinative elements.
Additionally, one might attempt to propose some fifth ingredient, and hold that anyproposed account of the emotions must be incomplete without making essential use ofthis fifth ingredient.  However, I don’t know of any plausible candidates.V. The Impact of Emotion on Cognition
These four proposals may be naturally divided into two categories.  The PurelyRatiocinative and the Modes of Cognition proposals are quitecognitivist– they both takeit to be essential to emotions that they play a particular sort of role in the processing ofinformation in the cognitive system, and especially that they play a particular sort of rolevis a vis ratiocination.  In comparison, the Phenomenal Feels and Somatic proposals are(relatively) non-cognitivist – they both (seem to7) allow that whether or not an agent hasan emotion might vary quite independently of the sorts of information processing that aregoing on in her cognitive system.
This categorization reveals a potential ground for favoring one pair of proposals over theother.  Insofar as we have good reason to think that emotions are essentially cognitive, wewill have good reason to reject the Phenomenal Feels and Somatic proposals.
I am inclined to say that we may unproblematically reach this conclusion simply byreflecting on our pre-theoretic expectations of a theory of emotions.  In designating theparadigmatic cases that such a theory must account for, we designate essentiallycognitive phenomena.  For example, in pointing towards paradigm cases of fear, we pre-theoretically can say that, if any state deserves to be called ‘fear’, then it must(essentially) be the sort of state that is normally responsible for producing characteristiccognitive effects:  the urge to escape the situation, the tendency to imagine horrible thingshappening, and the difficulty of concentrating upon unrelated matters.  If a proposedtheory of fear relegates these cognitive phenomena to an insignificant side role, then, Iam inclined to say, it doesn’t even deserve to be called ‘a theory of fear’.
Despite its intuitive force, the preceding argument will likely strike my opponents as abald-faced attempt to beg the question.  For this reason, it is worth noting that there arealternative strategies that the cognitivist might attempt to pursue here.  One such strategywould be to seek empirical evidence that phenomenal and somatic factors can varysignificantly across the various paradigm cases of a given emotion.  Hence, Nussbaum
6 Although Griffiths does not consider my Modes of Cognition proposal, it seems to me that this proposal isreasonably consistent with the general approach that Griffiths takes towards these issues, and it resonatesvery nicely with some of Griffiths comments (eg., pg 121).
7 This qualifier is here because there are many competing accounts of ‘phenomenal feels’, and some ofthese accounts hold that one’s phenomenal feels are determined in part by the roles that the various parts ofone’s cognitive system are playing.  While such views may end up having implications regarding cognition(information-processing), this must be by a round-about and currently-quite-unclear route.Fisher 10
(2001, pp 56-64) suggests that fear may have quite different phenomenal feels ondifferent occasions, or that one may be in fear without having any sort of distinctivephenomenology at all.  Similarly, she suggests, instances of a particular emotion mayhave quite different physiological effects in different subjects or at different times in agiven subject.
These empirical claims can be intuitively supported, at least to some extent, by reflectionon one’s own experience.  I suspect that Nussbaum is right that we will discover thatmost interesting physiological, behavioral and phenomenal classifications cross-cut ourpre-theoretic or folk-theoretic classifications of emotions; and hence that we will end upfeeling little pull to attach our folk-labels to physiological, behavioral, or phenomenalkinds.
However, it’s notclear to me that these empirical claims will actually be borne out.  Forall I know, it may turn out that fear really does regularly produce a certain cluster of(perhaps quite subtle or context dependent) physiological effects.  And, for all I know, itmay turn out that emotions really do have characteristic phenomenal feels, albeit onesthat I’m not very good at recognizing.  And even if it happens to turn out that emotionsdo typically have these features, I think westill should say that these aren’t the sorts offeatures that are essential to emotions.
Compare: for all I know, it may turn out that whenever I get angry, some particular bulblights up in some secret CIA office – but certainly that bulb’s lighting up is not anessential feature of my anger.  There is a strong inclination to say that (mere) somaticeffects and phenomenal feels should have pretty much the same role in a theory ofemotions as the CIA’s light bulb.  What’s centrally important about emotions is notwhich muscles they might cause to contract, which phenomenal buzzes they mightinvoke, or which bulbs they might light up – instead what’s centrally important about theemotions is that they change what we think and how we think.  I think it isobligatory thatany theory of the emotions must give center stage to these cognitive phenomena.  Theproblem with the Phenomenal Feels and Somatic proposals is that they don’t fulfill thisobligation.
That is my ‘hard-line’ position.  But I also recognize that there is a more conciliatoryposition available.  All parties may agree that it would be nice to give a good account ofthe various clusters of physiological and behavioral changes that people undergo.  Allparties may agree that it would be nice to develop a theory of what phenomenal feelingspeople have in various circumstances.  And all parties may agree that it would be nice(really nice!) to have a good theory of the different ways that cognition proceeds invarious sorts of paradigmatically emotional phenomena.  Given that we all agree that itwould be nice to develop all these theories, we needn’t begrudge any of the theorists whoare working to develop them.
Still, I maintain that the most important phenomena to be accounted for here – the oneswhich will have the greatest impact upon questions about how we should live our lives,about how we should treat one another, and about how we should develop our socialpolicies – are the phenomena that involve the effects that emotions have on cognition.
 link to page 11Fisher 11
We want to know why unrequited love makes it so hard for us to get on with our lives,not why it makes our hearts go pitter-pat.  We want to know whether homophobic rageimpairs people’s decision-making ability in a way that reduces their moral responsibilityfor their actions, not what this rage feels like.  We want to know the numerous sourcesand cognitive consequences of misogynistic disgust, not the physiological andphenomenal changes that accompany it.  For these reasons, I won’t very easily backdown from hard-line stance that a ‘real’ account of the emotions must centrally addressthese cognitive issues, and that any proposed account that fails to do this will therebycount as an account of the ‘emotions’ only in some quite attenuated sense.
Hence, I conclude that, at least for the purposes that I maintain are most important, wemay lay aside the Phenomenal Feels and Somatic proposals.  To account for the centrallyimportant effects that emotions have on cognition and especially upon ratiocination, onemust instead embrace somecognitive theory of the emotions.VI.  The Kinematics of Ratiocination
There is a wide range of logically possible cognitive theories of the emotions.  I willapproach these issues by contrasting two rather extreme positions – the PurelyRatiocinative proposal and an (overly) extreme version of my own modes of cognitionproposal.  These extreme positions stake competing claims regarding the sort of role thatemotions play in ratiocination.  To make clear the differences between these views, it willbe useful to say a bit more regarding ratiocination and the patterns of interaction amongbeliefs and desires within ratiocination – patterns which I will call thekinematics ofratiocination.
I take two things to be essential to ratiocinative processes.  First, these processes mustinvolve representational tokens – ‘beliefs’ – whose normal job in cognition is tocorrespond to contingent states of affairs in one’s environment, and other representationaltokens – ‘desires’ – whose normal job in cognition is to tend to bring it about that certainsorts of states of affairs obtain.8
8 A notion of ‘normal jobs’ (or of ‘natural purposes’ or ‘proper functions’) is central toteleofunctionalistunderstandings of cognition (e.g., Millikan 1984).  This notion allows that, in many cases, a thing may failto successfully perform its ‘normal job’, even while it still is the case that making reference to that thing’snormal job is essential to understanding that thing’s role within a cognitive system.     I should perhaps note that, when push comes to shove, the notion of ‘normality’ being called upon here,and throughout this paper, isn’t simple statistical normality, but rather (something like) accordance withgeneral principles that explain how success was achievedin past success cases, where success is taken tobe promoting the replication (and hence evolution) of similar entities (again see Millikan, 1984).  Hence, a‘normal job’ of a sperm is to fertilize an egg because that is how historically successful sperm have securedtheir evolutionary success, despite the fact that historically, only a vanishingly small fraction of all spermhave successfully performed this task.     A related (but in my opinion much less plausible) view is the popularfunctionalistview which holdsthat we should talk about the role that these tokensactually aredisposed to play within a cognitive system,rather than about what role theywould play in itif things were going normally.  The committedfunctionalist may, with relatively little difficulty, translate my talk of ‘normal jobs’ into a form that is moreacceptable to mainstream functionalism.
 link to page 12Fisher 12
Second, it must be the case that these processes normally display a particular sort ofkinematics – a particular sort of pattern in the ways that beliefs and desires normally aregenerated, retained or abandoned, and in the ways in which they interact with othercognitive elements.  The kinematics of ratiocination quite closely reflects certain relationsbetween the contents ofvarious representations.9  For example, when one forms a beliefon the basis of other beliefs, there is normally an appropriate relation of support betweenthe content of the other beliefs and the content of the belief one forms.  Similarly,whenever one actively considers beliefs whose contents are contradictory, one normallyabandons one or the other of these beliefs (or both).   Similarly there are patterns in thenormal formation, retention, and abandonment of instrumental desires, and these patternsalso track relations between the contents of the various representations in question.
It is the kinematics of ratiocination that we (at least attempt to) report upon when weadduce reasons for the various beliefs and instrumental desires that we have.  It is likelythat humans are the only Earthly species with the capacity to engage in long trains ofratiocination regarding abstract topics, or with the capacity to give overt reports aboutthese processes.  However, it is at least plausible that many non-human animals engage inprocesses that are more or less like short chains of human ratiocination.  Hence, onemight claim that emotionsare essentially ratiocinative elements without committingoneself to denying that animals have states that deserve to be called emotions too.VII.  Competing Cognitive Theories.
Given the above notions of ratiocination and its kinematics, we may now state twoextreme cognitive proposals regarding the nature of emotions.
At one extreme is thepurely ratiocinative proposal, which holds that emotions are aspecial variety of one of the paradigmatic players in ratiocination – e.g., of beliefs, ofdesires, or perhaps of some complex combination of beliefs and desires.  On thisproposal, what distinguishes emotions from other ratiocinative players is the particularsort of content that emotions have; as one commonly taken line would have it, thecharacteristic content of emotions involves an evaluation of the role that some objectmight play within the scheme of things that one values.  Finally, the purely ratiocinativeproposal holds that the kinematics of emotions – the patterns in the ways that emotionsinteract with one another and with other cognitive elements –just isthe kinematics of theparadigmatic players in ratiocination.  I.e., emotional states are formed in the same sortsof ways that ordinary beliefs or instrumental desires are formed; emotional states impactupon cognition just by serving as premises, goals or defeaters in the ratiocinativeprocesses by which further beliefs or instrumental desires are formed or abandoned; andemotional states are shed in the same sorts of ways that ordinary beliefs or instrumentaldesires are shed.
At the other extreme is theextreme modes of cognition proposal, which holds thatemotions are best understood as states that arise externally to ratiocination, and that
9 The representations in question may include ratiocinative beliefs and desires, but they may also includenon-ratiocinative elements that impinge on ratiocination, like perceptual representations or intuitions.
 link to page 13Fisher 13
modulate the ways in which cognition (including ratiocination) proceeds.  On thisextreme proposal, what distinguishes emotional states from non-emotional states is nottheir representational content, but instead it is their kinematics – the various sorts ofcauses and effects that emotional states normally have within cognition.  In an extremeform, this proposal holds that this kinematics is very much different from the kinematicsof the paradigmatic players in ratiocination.  For example, it may be essential to certainemotions that they normally draw our attention to certain things, set our priorities,introduce compelling urges in us to do various things, affect which sorts of memories aremost easily accessible, affect which rules for inference, learning, or decision we employ,affect which sorts of features our perceptual systems will be geared towards picking out,and/or alter which sorts of scenarios we may easily imagine.
Between these two extremes there is a wide range of possible intermediate positions.  Amore moderate version of the purely ratiocinative proposal might admit that it is essentialto some emotional states that they have a kinematics that, in fact, differs in at least someways from the kinematics of ordinary beliefs and desires.  A more moderate version ofthe modes of cognition proposal might admit that the representational content of someemotional states plays a role in making them be the emotional states that they are, and/oradmit that some emotional states eitherthemselves play a belief-like or desire-like role inratiocination, or else generatebeliefs or desires which themselves play a belief-like ordesire-like role in ratiocination.  Avery moderate version of one of these extremeproposals might be indistinguishable from a very moderate version of the other.
Above I suggested that one might find intuitive motivation for a good theory of theemotions by attending to common metaphors that depict emotions as spirits or demonsthat possess an agent and alter the ways in which her cognition proceeds.  This metaphorclearly points us towards some form of the modes of cognition proposal.  But inparticular, it points us towards a moderate, rather than an extreme, version of thisproposal.  For demons clearly might generate beliefs or desires which might themselvesplay a belief-like or desire-like role in ratiocination, and there is also an intuitive sense inwhich a demonic possession might beaboutsome object (e.g., an object that caused ademonic possession to begin, or an object that the demon draws attention to or causes oneto imagine things about).  Furthermore, there is an intuitive sense in which a demonicpossession couldn’t be the sort of demonic possession that it is, if it weren’t of a sort thatnormally generates certain sorts of beliefs or desires, or if it weren’t about the object thatit is about.  Hence, the demons-metaphor provides intuitive motivation for aslightlymoderate form of the modes of cognition proposal.
As will become clear in what follows, I think that the best theory of emotions will indeedbe a slightly moderate form of the modes of cognition proposal – one which takes onmuch more of the modes of cognition proposal than have most existing theories of theemotions.  I propose that emotions may be usefully categorized on the basis of (1) theclusters of things that normally trigger them, (2) the clusters of modulating effects thatthey normally have upon other cognitive processes, and (3) the sorts of intentionalcontent that they normally have.10  As is the case with most categorizations in the life
10 Again, I think the appropriate reading for “normally” is a teleo-functionalist reading.Fisher 14
sciences, we should expect this categorization to yield classes with somewhat fuzzyboundaries.VIII.  Why think Emotions are Beliefs?
Before I argue in defense of a (slightly moderate) modes of cognition proposal, it will begood to look at some reasons that might lead people to embrace a purely-ratiocinativeproposal instead.  This will serve not only to allay suspicions that I am arguing against astraw man, but also to broach some important topics that any theory of the emotions mustaddress.  In later sections I will argue that a modes of cognition proposal cansatisfactorily address each of these topics.
For the sake of brevity, I will concentrate our attention upon just the version of the purelyratiocinative proposal that has been most strongly defended by philosophers, the versionthat holds that emotions are a sort of belief (Solomon 1999, Neu 2000, Nussbaum 2001).I will not explicitly consider other purely ratiocinative views that instead hold emotionsto be a sort of desire or a sort of complex combination of beliefs and desires (e.g., Marks1982; Robinson 1983; Roberts 1988; Oakley 1992).  However, many (although perhapsnot all) of the considerations that arise regarding the view that emotions are a sort ofbelief would arise in a similar form regarding these alternative views.
A good starting point is the apparentintentionality of emotions.  We commonly, andseemingly quite successfully, attribute various sorts ofintentionalityoraboutnessto ouremotions.  We are jealousofpeople; we are angryatorwiththem; and we feel loveforthem.  We are afraidthatcertain events might happen.  We are disgustedbyvariousobjects.  We are elatedaboutevents that go well, and grieveoverour losses.  A purelyratiocinative proposal has a ready explanation for this apparent intentionality:  emotionsare a sort of belief, and beliefs are, of course, paradigmatic bearers of intentionality.
A second point that might seem to weigh in favor of a purely ratiocinative view is the factthat, many emotions seem to have a kinematics that is, at least at first blush, quite likethat of beliefs.  For example, all parties will agree that in most cases, someone who isafraid of a particular object will behave in roughly the same ways as someone whobelieves that object is dangerous, and someone who loves a person will behave in muchthe same ways as someone who believes that the well being of that person is of crucialimportance to her valued projects.  These observations leave open the possibility thatemotions are unlike ordinary beliefs in many other important ways (as I will soon arguethat they are), but these observations do lend at least some initial intuitive credibility tothe claim that the emotions in these casesjust arebeliefs.
Similarly, all parties may agree that, at least in many cases, a subject enters into anemotional state soon after she gets what would be good evidence for a correspondingbelief.  For example, a subject comes to fear, say, poly-unsaturated fats soon after shegets good evidence that poly-unsaturated fats pose a danger to her.  Again, suchobservations leave open the possibility that many emotions come about in ways that areFisher 15
importantly different from the way that beliefs come about, but still these observations dolend some initial credibility to the view that emotions are beliefs.
A third point that might seem to favor a purely ratiocinative proposal is that it can tell acoherent story regarding the ways in which our emotional reactions change as we gainexperience and wisdom.  New experiences offer us new evidence regarding the sorts ofroles that various things may play in our lives.  When emotions are taken to be a sort ofbelief, it makes sense that this changing base of evidence may lead to changes inemotions.  And insofar as our growing base of evidence tends to give us increasinglyaccurate beliefs about the world, this view may tell a story about how the emotions maybe ‘educated’ to better fit the world.
Similarly, a modes of cognition view has a story to tell about cross-cultural differences inemotions.  Different sorts of evidence are available in different cultures, and hence, bythe kinematics by which people form beliefs of the basis of evidence, people in differentcultures form different emotions.
A fourth point that might attract people to a purely-ratiocinative proposal is that itpromises to offer a unified account of both the brief, ‘hot’ emotions that arise only for theduration of the heat of the moment, and ‘cooler’ longer-lasting emotions that may staywith us for months or years.  For there seems to be some important sense in which thereis a unified account of both those ‘occurrent’ beliefs that briefly play a prominent andactive role in our thinking, and those ‘non-occurent’ or ‘dispositional’ beliefs that wehold for very long periods of time and that only subtly or occasionally have significantinfluences on our thoughts.  A purely ratiocinative proposal promises to spell out aunified account of emotions as a corollary of a unified account of beliefs.
A fifth point is that the purely ratiocinative proposal offers to make sense of the intuitiveidea that some emotions are rational and others are irrational.  If emotions are a sort ofbelief, then they may depict the world as it is or they may fail to do so, and they may bewell-founded or ill-founded.  Hence, the rationality of the emotions may be construed asa special case of the rationality of beliefs.
In the coming sections, I will return to each of the above issues, and argue that a modesof cognition proposal gives a treatment of these issues that is at least as good as (andoften much better than) the one given by a purely ratiocinative proposal.IX.  The Intentionality of Emotions.
A (slightly moderate) modes of cognition view allows that there are several differentsenses in which emotions have intentionality.
For one thing, this view allows that it may be essential to emotions that they interact invarious ways with other representations in a cognitive system.  When an emotion hasessential links to representations that are about a particular object, there is then aderivative sense in which that emotion is about that object too.  For example, if anemotion is normally caused by beliefs about some object, and/or if this emotion normally
 link to page 16Fisher 16
tends to shift cognitive resources towards doing processing that is itself about that object,then there is a sense in which that emotion is about that object too.
It may be worth noting that this sort of intentionality does not involve anydirection of fitbetween emotions and the world.  This sort of intentionality is more like the intentionalityof a name or a concept than the intentionality of a belief or desire.  Things that have thissort of intentionality may beaboutobjects in the world, but they needn’t represent thoseobjects as being a certain way, nor need they tend to bring it about that those objectsbecome a certain way.
A modes of cognition view also allows that many emotionsdo have a direction of fit.  Atoken has abelief-like ormind-to-world direction of fit if it is a normal job of themechanisms that produce that token to produce tokens in a way that tracks relevantaspects of how the world is in order to enable further mechanisms to successfully performtheir normal jobs.  E.g., so long as belief-fixing mechanisms are doing their normal jobs,one will normally form the belief that the cat is on the mat only when the cat is on themat, and this belief may then lead to the success of further reasoning and behavior.  Atoken has adesire-like orworld-to-minddirection of fit if a normal job of that token incognition is to tend to bring it about that the world is a certain way.11  E.g., in normalcognition, a desire that the cat be on the mat has it as a normal job to tend to bring itabout that the cat is on the mat.
It is quite clear that many emotions have a belief-like direction of fit.  E.g., fears arenormally generated in response to danger and bring about appropriate responses todanger; and instances of grief are normally generated in occasions where one has suffereda significant loss, and they bring it about that one thinks through many of the significantconsequences that such a change in circumstances has on one’s projects.
In other instances, it seems most plausible to attribute only adesire-like direction of fit toemotion states.  For example, it is implausible that it is a normal job of rage-states (or,more properly speaking, of the mechanisms that generate rage-states) to track someaspect of the world.  Instead it seems that rage states may normally be brought about in afair number of different ways in a fair number of different circumstances.  It is plausibleto suppose that a normal job of a rage state is to bring it about that harm comes to the‘object’ of one’s rage.  This certainly seems to be a consequence that rage is often gearedtowards, and further there are good design reasons to have a cognitive system sometimesgo into states that are geared towards doing this – such states may do well to fend offdirect threats and/or to deter future aggressions, and the mere fact that an agent isdisposed to become enraged makes that agent a less attractive target for exploitation byothers (Pinker 1997).  In light of these observations, it is more plausible to attribute torage a desire-like direction of fit than a belief-like one.  Similar considerations suggestthatloveprimarily has a desire-like direction of fit – the normal job of love is (at leastplausibly) to bring about and preserve the well-being of its object.
11 These proposed definitions owe much to Ruth Millikan’s (1984) work.
 link to page 17Fisher 17
One common response to suggestions along these lines is to say that these emotions dohave a belief-like direction of fit:  lovedepicts an object as being such that its well-beingis central to one’s valued projects, while ragedepicts an object as being such that itsbeing damaged would be central to one’s valued projects.  If such a move is acceptable,we might reduceall desires to beliefs:  any desire for X is tantamount to a belief that X is‘good’ or that X would fit nicely in the scheme of things that one values.  There may begood reasons to resist this sort of move.12  However, even if we allow this move, weshould note that there is still an important distinction to be made between tokens thatattempt to reflect facts abouthow certain value-free aspects of the worldare (e.g., howthe cat is positioned with respect to the mat) and tokens that attempt to reflect facts abouthow it would be good for the worldto be.  Hence, even if we allow this move, we stillmust end up agreeing that rage and love normally work only in the latter way, whilemany beliefs and many other emotions work in the former.
Interestingly, there are some emotional states which havebotha belief-like and a desire-like direction of fit – they say that the world is one way, and at the same time they try tobring it about that the world is some other way.  E.g., it is plausible that immediate fearstates have it as a normal jobboth (1) to indicate to other cognitive mechanisms thatsome objectisa pressing danger,and(2) to bring it about that that object no longer posesa pressing danger.  Hence, there is a sense in which an immediate fear state represents anobject as being dangerous; and there is another sense in which the very same fear staterepresents a desirable state of affairs, one in which the object no longer poses such adanger.  Ruth Millikan (1996) calls representations like these ‘pushmi-pullyu’representations, and suggests that such representations are the more primitive precursorsof more specialized representations that have only one direction of fit.  On a modes ofcognition view, it is not at all surprising that many emotional states would have this dual-nature.  As we will now see, this dual nature is more problematic for a purely-ratiocinative view.X.  The Kinematics of Emotions.
One primary difference between the two extreme proposals stated above involves thekinematics of emotions, the normal patterns of interaction between emotions and othercognitive states.  The purely ratiocinative proposal held that the kinematics of emotionsjust is the kinematics of paradigmatic players in ratiocination, beliefs and instrumental
12 For one set of reasons, see Lewis (1996), who argues that the rational kinematics of beliefs differs fromthat of desires, and hence concludes that no single state may display both sorts of kinematics inratiocination.  Another reason to resist this move may be drawn from the work of various authors (Millikan1984, Dennett 1975, Davidson 1973) who suggest that attributions of representational content must beguided by considerations that mirror those that constrain good explanations; there is a real concern thatattributing a belief-like direction of fit to a desire does not deliver any explanatory mileage beyond what isdelivered by attributing to it a desire-like direction of fit, and hence, for reasons of parsimony, we shouldattribute only a desire-like direction of fit to such states.  Notice that the case under consideration (wherewe’re asking whether a desire that P might also be well-construed as a belief thatit would be good that P)differs from the pushmi-pullyu cases discussed in moment (where we’re noting that a single state can serveboth as a desire-like representation of P and, at the same time, a belief-like representation of Q, where bothP and Q may be expressed in value-free terms).Fisher 18
desires.  A modes of cognition proposal denies this, and holds that the kinematics ofemotions differs significantly from that of beliefs and instrumental desires.
Let us now take up the question of which of cognitive proposal does best to capture thekinematics of emotions.  My arguments in this section will resonate with those of anumber of other authors who have argued that the rational kinematics of emotions is notreducible to the rational kinematics of beliefs.  (De Sousa 2003 attributes such argumentsto de Sousa 1987; Ben-Ze'ev 2000; Goldie 2000; and Elster 2003.)
As a starting point, we may consider the relation between kinematics and direction of fit.We have seen that many emotions have a belief-like direction of fit – they are producedby mechanisms whose normal job involves being sensitive to information about how theworld is and producing emotional states that will then convey that information to systemsthat will make good use of it.  A purely ratiocinative view that takes emotions to be a sortof belief will likely at least approximate the kinematics of these emotions.
However, we have also seen that some emotions have a desire-like direction of fit – theyhave it as a normal job to bring about changes in how the world is, and not necessarily totrack how the world in fact is.  The rational kinematics of desire-like states is often takento be different from that of belief-like states (Lewis 1996).  Hence, it seems, the purelyratiocinative view that emotions are beliefs will probably fail to accommodate thekinematics of emotions that have a desire-like direction of fit.
More complicated, still, are the pushmi-pullyu emotional states which have both a belief-like and a desire-like direction of fit.  It would be quite surprising if such states have justthe kinematics of ratiocinative beliefs.  It might be more promising to construe these aspurely ratiocinative complexes involving both beliefs and desires as components (as isproposed by Marks 1982 and Oakley 1992).  However, there will still be many hardchallenges for such a view, including Lewis’ (1996) argument that it is impossible that asingle state haveboththe ratiocinative kinematics of a beliefandthe ratiocinativekinematics of a desire.  I think the most plausible conclusion is to deny that thekinematics of emotions reduces to the kinematics of beliefs and/or desires, and to insteadembrace the flexibility in describing the kinematics of emotions that is afforded by amodes-of-cognition view.
This conclusion may also be supported in other ways.  We may begin by considering ourcatalog of modulating effects that emotions might have upon cognition.  There is a fairamount of empirical evidence supporting the claim that certain emotions normally haveeffects of these sorts (see, e.g., Cosmides &amp; Tooby, 2000).  Furthermore, reflection uponthe usefulness of emotions as an adaptive ‘design feature’ in cognition makes plausiblethe claim that emotions would have many effects of these sorts; and introspectivereflection upon our own emotional experiences seems to reveal that emotions do havemany of these effects on our cognition.
Take, for example, a fear of a coiled snake.  Introspectively, this fear certainly seems notto be a mere premise that might be combined with other premises to yield furtherconclusions or combined with beliefs and desires to yield further instrumental desires.
 link to page 19  link to page 19  link to page 19  link to page 19Fisher 19
Instead this fear seems to be a state that (at least normally) demands that the snake beattended to; that makes memories of snakes readily available while making memories ofunrelated matters very difficult to recall; that allocates various cognitive resourcestowards this snake and away from distant or unrelated matters; and that floods one’simagination with images of what the snake might do.  Furthermore, it seems to beessential to the fear that it is the sort of state that is at least normally poised to grip one’scognition in these ways.  A representation that is poisedonly to serve as a premise inratiocination and that is not poised to grip one’s cognition in these other ways seemsthereforeprobably not to be an instance of fear at all.13
Putting the same point more generally (and borrowing a phrase from Proust), there is astrong intuition that emotions are not thoughts; instead they are upheavals in thought.14The characteristics that make emotionsupheavalsare characteristics that make thekinematics of emotions significantly different from the kinematics that is characteristic ofbeliefs and desires in ratiocination.  If emotions are a sort of belief, then they must be asort of belief whose kinematics is quite different from the characteristic kinematics ofbeliefs in ratiocination.15
The problems for a purely ratiocinative view continue to mount as we compare the waysthat ratiocinative beliefs are normally generated and abandoned to the ways in whichemotional states are normally generated and abandoned.
The kinematics of ratiocination is such that having in mind a strong line of reasoningsupporting a conclusion (and having an interest in determining whether or not thisconclusion holds) normally generates a belief in this conclusion.  It certainlyseemsto bethe case that one does not come to have an emotion in the same way.  I canratiocinatively recognize how very important someone or some goal is towards projectsthat I hold dear – at least I can be fully poised to use such claims as premises in furtherratiocination – and yet I can fail to be emotionally engaged.  A classic example isreasoning to the conclusion that someone would fit wonderfully into all the projects thatyou value, and yet not falling in love.  A good argument is normally sufficient to get oneto believe its conclusion, but there isno sort of good argument that is normally sufficientto get one to fall in love.16  Hence, the kinematics of love must be different from the
13  At best, this state might be an abnormal, pathological instance of fear – the sort of fear that one imaginesvicious sociopaths to have.  A teleofunctionalist view does well to accommodate the possibility of suchpathological cases.  See also Lewis (1983).
14 One might find it ironic that Martha Nussbaum – a leading defender of the view that emotions are a sortof thought – chose to entitle her (2001) book “Upheavals of Thought”.
15 I am remaining neutral regarding how many representations with belief-like direction of fit we want tocount as ‘beliefs’.  Nussbaum (2001) sometimes states one of the central tenets of her view as being that itis both necessary and sufficient for having a particular emotion that one have a belief (or judgment) with anappropriate content.  If we construe the term ‘belief’ very broadly, then the necessity-half of this claim isplausibly true, at least for many emotions.  However, I think the sufficiency-half of this claim is false – fora state to be an emotion, it is not sufficient that it be a belief with the right content; for, additionally, it mustbe a state which, at least normally, modulates cognition in various upheaval-like ways, and this issomething that a belief with that content needn’t normally do.  (This is intuitively illustrated by the snake-fear case described above, and by the arguing-someone-into-love case below.)
16 One potential objection might go as follows:  “Sure, you can hear a compelling argument for P (e.g., thatsomeone would fit wonderfully into all the projects you value) without thereby falling in love.  That just
 link to page 20  link to page 20Fisher 20
kinematics of ratiocinative beliefs.  And hence, if love is a ‘belief’ at all, it must be adifferent sort of belief from the beliefs that play in ordinary ratiocination.
Similar observations apply to the kinematics surrounding the discovery of contradictorybeliefs.  If one discovers oneself to have contradictory beliefs, then (barring cases ofextreme insanity) one abandons onebelief or the other, or both.17  In contrast, it certainlyseems that discovering that a ratiocinative belief runs counter to an emotional state isoften not enough to get either that belief or that emotion to go away.  For example, whenI stand in high places, my ratiocinative processes can (seemingly) be univocally confidentabout my complete safety, and yet my dizzying fear of falling may persist unabated, andprevent me from thinking about other things in the comfortable way that I ordinarily can.I can attend quite carefully both to my belief that I am safe and to my fear of falling,without either of these seeming to be weakened by the other.  This suggests that thekinematics of emotions must be different from the kinematics of ratiocinative beliefs.When one ratiocinative belief runs counter to another, and both are attended to, at leastone of these must be defeated (on pain of great irrationality); but not so when an emotionruns counter to a ratiocinative belief.
More generally, I cannot remember any experience in which it seemed that I did somereasoning and arrived at or abandonedan emotion as a conclusion.  Instead, it seems, myemotions consistently (sometimes even obstinately) lag behind my reasoning.  I maintainmy attention on certain topics – the ones which I’ve found to do pretty well at enticingmy emotions – and then, if I’m lucky, my emotions eventually follow suit.18  Insofar as itis likely that this introspective report is correct and representative of others’ emotions,shows that P wasn’t the relevant content for falling in love.  To fall in love, one must instead come tobelieve some other content Q.”  One plausible reaction at this point is to demand a specification ofwhichcontent Q is supposed to be sufficient – a demand that I doubt will ever be met.  But even without waitingfor a particular specification of Q, we may note that there is a strong intuition thatwhatevercontentQ theobjector settles upon, a good argument for Q may compel a rational subject to believe Q, but needn’tcompel that subject to fall in love.  It often takes more than just a compelling argument (even one for a veryfancy conclusion) to get someone to fall in love.     A possible rejoinder would be to deny that the characteristic content of emotions is such that one couldcome to believe it in more prosaic ways.  De Sousa (2003) attributes versions of this rejoinder to Goldie(2000), Wollheim (2000), Charland (2002) and Tappolet (forthcoming).  Whatever merits this rejoindermight have, it is worth stressing that this rejoinder involves a significant departure from the purelyratiocinative proposal described above.  For this rejoinder holds that emotions have content quite differentfrom the sorts of content that play into ratiocinative relations, and hence this rejoinder must deny the purelyratiocinative proposal that the kinematics of emotions just is the kinematics of ratiocination.
17 It may often be, however, that a defeated belief is not completely expunged from one’s long-termmemory.  Hence, one may repeatedly find oneself believing something that has been defeated many times,as Nussbaum (2001, pp. 35-6) reports that she repeatedly finds herself believing that the U.S. SupremeCourt is in California.  What one cannot do, however, on pain of great irrationality, is retain a pair ofcontradictory beliefs in ratiocination while carefully attending to each of them.  I am confident, forexample, that whenever Nussbaum attends to her contradictory beliefs about the location of the SupremeCourt, her belief that it is in California is quickly defeated, and prevented (at least for the time being) fromplaying a further role in her ratiocination.
18 My introspective report is picturesquely echoed in Plato:  “Your passion boils and rages, and fights forwhat you regard as right… [O]nly success or death can stop it fighting the good fight, unless it is recalledby your rational mind and calmed down, as a dog is by a shepherd” (Plato, Republic 440c).
 link to page 21Fisher 21
this is an intuitive reason to conclude that emotions are not ratiocinative beliefs, and thattheir kinematics differs from that of ratiocinative beliefs.
Thus far my argument in this section has been largely negative.  I have offered a numberof compelling reasons for thinking that the kinematics of emotions must be quite differentfrom the kinematics of ratiocination.  Since different emotions have different directionsof fit, and some even have both directions of fit at the same time, it is unlikely thatemotions have just the kinematics of ratiocinative beliefs.  It seems to be essential toemotions that they areupheavals in thought– that they have effects quite different fromthe effects of ordinary beliefs.  Furthermore, it seems that emotions are not generated inthe same way that ratiocinative beliefs are generated; and it seems that they cannotalways be defeated by countervailing beliefs in the way that ratiocinative beliefs almostalways can.  All of these considerations weigh in favor of a modes of cognition proposalover a purely ratiocinative proposal.
Eventually, it would be good to have a positive account of the kinematics of emotions,rather than just the negative conclusion that this kinematics differs significantly from thekinematics of ratiocination.  We shouldn’t expect to be able to generate this account fromthe comfort of the philosopher’s armchair; instead it will probably take a lot of hardempirical work.  I mentioned above [in the preceding paper] a catalog of potentialimpacts that emotions might have on cognition, together with intuitive, empirical andtheoretical reasons for thinking that many emotions do have such impacts.  Futureempirical work may do much to extend, modify and/or refine this catalog.
A full positive account of the kinematics of emotions must also include an understandingof when emotions are generated, and when they are abandoned.  A full list of the variousways in which emotions are generated must contain, at least, the following:
•  by ratiocinative events (e.g., your putting the clues together to reach the
conclusion that your spouse is cheating may trigger anger or jealousy)
•  by other cognitive events (e.g., your sub-conscious recognition of a threatening
posture may trigger fear)
•  by not-very-cognitive events (e.g., changes in blood sugar level19).
There are various ways you might consciously attempt to influence your emotions, eitherto change them or to cease them.  These include:
19 One might be inclined to include in this category the classic experiments in which Stanley Schacter andJerome Singer (1962) found that subjects who had been injected with epinephrine were more likely thancontrols to report having emotional experiences.  I think it ispossiblethat epinephrine injections mightbring about real changes in an agent’s cognitive/emotional state.  However, I think the most plausible initialhypothesis is just that the epinephrine brings about a cluster of bodily changes, thereby setting off a clusterof physiological sensors that would normally go off in such circumstances only if the subject were in anemotional state; hence subjects who are used to using these sensors as indicators of emotional states tend toconclude that they are in emotional states.  (And then subjects attempt to come up with – or ‘confabulate’ –the most plausible explanation for their being in some sort of emotional state.)  So, I’m inclined to say thatthese probably aren’t real cases of emotion – instead they’re just cases where subjects are tricked by acluster of bodily changes into thinking that they are in emotional states.Fisher 22
•  Alter your ratiocination.  (Concentrate on something else; silently count to 10; try
to bring to mind occasions where you felt other emotions)
•  Alter your surroundings.  (Get some fresh air, quiet, food, exercise, sex or sleep).•  In learning to ride a bicycle, you consciously force yourself through the motions
several times, and pretty soon sub-conscious systems pick up the skill.  Similarly,it seems likely that sub-conscious skills may be developed for diminishing and/orprofitably utilizing at least some emotions.
Since different cultural practices lead members of different cultures to do different onesof these things in response to certain circumstances, any of the above sorts of effectsmight help bring about cross-cultural differences in when people experience emotions,and in how emotions affect them.
These comments are meant only as a perfunctory attempt to suggest the sorts of issuesthat would arise in describing a full kinematics of the emotions, and to suggest that such afull kinematics might have the means to give a good account of both the ‘educability’ ofemotions, and their variation across cultures.  Unfortunately, it is beyond the scope of thispaper to pursue these issues in more detail.XI.  A Unified Account of the Emotions.
Common usage categorizes some strikingly different phenomena under the sameemotional headings.  For example, consider the typical response to seeing a coiled snake– a very gripping upheaval in thought, though one with a very short time span – and thetypical response to finding that one’s employer must fire a significant number ofemployees – a state that may persist for months or even years, with varying effects onone’s cognition.  Common usage counts both these responses as instances of fear.
One potential response – the one given by Griffiths (1997) – to such cases would be tosay that common usage has mistakenly lumped together disparate phenomena.  There is anatural class of phenomena including the response to the snake and many other ‘heat ofthe moment’ responses that generate similar physiological and behavioral effects.  As forthe ‘fear’ of being fired, this is some quite different phenomenon, one which a maturepsychology would not lump in with the (properly so called) fear of a coiled snake.  I grantthat it might turn out that the ‘emotions’ are a motley lot that defy a unifiedunderstanding, but I think we should be reluctant to settle upon this conclusion.
This is a good point to return to the demons-metaphor which has, thus far, served us wellas an intuitive motivation.  Intuitively, demonic possessions may last for different lengthsof time and may vary in their effects during their duration.  Despite all these differences,there may be many traits that these demonic possessions have in common – they allinvolve modulations in cognition.  Further, there intuitively may be useful ways ofcategorizing demonic possessions that lump together short term possessions and longerterm ones.  E.g., these possessions may be similar in how they are caused, in what theyare ‘about’, or in the sorts of effects that they have on cognition.Fisher 23
Similarly, if we conceive of emotions as essentially being states that normally modulateone’s mode of cognition, then we may give a quite unified account of emotions thatproduce such changes over shorter or longer periods of time, and of emotions thatproduce different sorts of changes at different points during their duration.  Furthermore,this approach to understanding emotions allows that useful categorizations of emotionsmight lump together certain ‘heat of the moment’ emotions with other ‘cooler’ emotionsthat have similar causes, effects, or representational contents.
For example, the ‘hot’ and immediate fear of a snake is like the ‘cooler’ fear of beingfired in that both are normally triggered by indicators of a potential danger, in that bothserve to represent the presence of such a danger, and in that both tend to bring aboutmany modulations in cognition that serve to mitigate this danger – e.g., drawing attentionand cognitive resources to this danger, making more easily accessible those memoriesthat are relevant to this danger, and forcing the imagination of scenarios involving thisdanger.  It is at least plausible that there is an interesting natural grouping of emotionalresponses that have this sort of cognitive profile, and hence it is at least plausible thatcommon usage really has captured an interesting natural grouping in categorizing theseinstances together.
Hence, I conclude that a modes of cognition view offers good prospects for offering aunified account of both ‘heat of the moment’ and ‘cooler’ emotions.XII.  The Rationality of Emotions.
In this final section, I will consider the question of whether emotions are essentiallyirrationalupheavals in our thought, or whether there might be a sense in which emotionsmay be rational or intelligent.
My discussion above suggests a number of reasons to think that emotions arenot rational.It is common to take as a paradigm of rationality the kinematics of ratiocination – theways in which we form ratiocinative beliefs and desires on the basis of other beliefs anddesires.  I have argued that the kinematics of emotions is probably quite different fromthe kinematics of ratiocination.  Hence, in this sense, emotions fail to be ‘rational’.Furthermore, I have argued that our emotions often stubbornly persist in the face ofcontrary evidence and our ratiocinative attempts to change them.  As much as ourevidence and our ratiocination sometimes recommend falling in love, our hearts often failto follow suit; as much as our evidence and our ratiocination maintain that a glasselevator is perfectly safe, our fear persists undiminished.  Hence, there is a sense in whichemotions often come into conflict with the paradigm of ‘rationality’ that is ratiocination.
Despite these observations, there are also a number of interesting senses in which manyemotions are ‘rational’.  We have noted that many emotional states have (belief-likeand/or desire-like) representational content.  Hence, there is a sense in which an emotionmay be ‘rational’ or ‘irrational’ depending on how well or poorly it coheres with one’sbeliefs and desires.  We have also noted that emotions are often triggered by states thatthemselves have representational content.  Hence, there is a sense in which an emotionmay be ‘rational’ or ‘irrational’ depending upon whether or not it was caused by
 link to page 24Fisher 24
representations whose contents make reasonable the embracing of the content of thatemotion.  In both of these senses, many ordinary fears would be deemed ‘rational’, whilemany compulsive phobias would be deemed ‘irrational’ – a categorization that fits willwith common intuitions.
Additionally, a modes of cognition proposal holds that it is essential to emotions that theynormally have many striking effects on cognition.  In many cases, such modulations maybe deemedusefulordetrimental,aptorinapt,rationalorirrational.
This point should not be taken lightly.  One lesson of a half-century of ArtificialIntelligence research is that, for many interesting domains of problems, it is relativelyeasy to describe an algorithmic procedure that wouldeventuallyfind a solution for agiven problem, but it often is quite challenging to find an algorithm that will do soquicklyand withlimited computational resources.  What are efficient computationalstrategies in some domains are quite poorly suited to many other domains.  Hence, one ofthe keys to developing anything like general artificial intelligence seems to be developingways of shifting and combining computational strategies – or ‘modes of computation’, ifyou will – in ways that allow a system to deal efficiently with whatever problems are athand.  Insofar as these findings are indicative of the sorts of design challenges thatevolutionary design processes have faced in building effective cognitive systems, thelesson is that general intelligence probably must consist in often shifting and combiningcognitive strategies – ormodes of cognition – in order to deal effectively with the varioussorts of problems that animals face on different occasions.  Hence, one might conclude,emotions (construed as modes of cognition) are probably of very central importance inmaking us be the sorts of generally rational and intelligent agents that we are.20
The preceding considerations give us theoretical reasons to think that our emotions –construed as states that modulate our cognition – play an essential role in (our peculiarlyhuman form of) rationality.  We also have strong empirical reasons to accept thisconclusion.  Damasio (1994) has quite convincingly argued on the basis of empiricalstudies that normal emotional capacities are essential to ordinary reasoning and planning– both in providing necessary modulations in reasoning strategy, and in generating states(of brain and body) whose existence may then serve to support further reasoning.  Whenour emotions do their normal jobs well, they play a central role in our rationality, andwhen they fail to do their jobs well, the result is often significant irrationality.
Hence, a modes of cognition view does well to capture the senses in which our emotionsare alwaysnon-rational (in that they work differently from, and sometimes counter to,our ratiocination), and the undeniable senses in which they are of central importance toour rationality and intelligence.
20 For a critical discussion of some reasoning along these lines, see Evans (2002).Fisher 25References.
Ben-Ze'ev, Aaron. 2000.The Subtlety of Emotions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Charland, Louis. 2002. &quot;The Natural Kind Status of Emotion.&quot;British Journal for thePhilosophy of Science 53:511-37.
Cosmides, Leda, and John Tooby. 2000. &quot;Evolutionary Psychology and the Emotions.&quot; InHandbook of Emotions, Michael Lewis and Jeannette M. Haviland-Jones, 91-115.New York: Guilford Press.
Damasio, Antonio. 1994.Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain.
New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons.
Davidson, Donald. 1973, ‘Radical Interpretation’,Dialectica, 27.
de Sousa, Ronald. 1987.The Rationality of Emotion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
_____. 2003 “Emotion”.Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/emotion/
Dennett, Daniel. 1975.  “True Believers:  The Intentional Strategy and Why it Works”
reprinted in D. Rosenthal ed.The Nature of Mind.  Oxford: UP.  pp. 339-53.
Elster, Jon. 2003. &quot;Emotion and Action.&quot; InThinking About Feeling: ContemporaryPhilosophers on Emotions, ed. Robert C. Solomon. Oxford; New York: OxfordUP.
Evans, Dylan. 2002. &quot;The search hypothesis of emotions&quot;.British Journal for thePhilosophy of Science 53:497-509.
Frank, Robert. 1988.Passions Within Reason: The Strategic Role of Emotions. New
York: Norton.
Goldie, Peter. 2000.The Emotions: A Philosophical Exploration. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gordon, R. 1987.The Structure of Emotions.  Cambridge:  Cambridge UP.
Griffiths, Paul. 1997.What Emotions Really Are: The Problem of PsychologicalCategories. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
James, William. 1884.  “What is an Emotion?”Mind, 9, 188-205.Fisher 26
Lange, Carl. 1885.Om Sindsbevaegelser: Et psyko-fysiologisk studie in C.G.Lange &amp;
W.James (Eds.), I.A.Haupt (Trans.)The Emotions, 1922, Balimore: Williams andWilkins.
Lewis, David. 1983. “Mad Pain and Martian Pain” reprinted in D. Rosenthal ed.TheNature of Mind.  Oxford: UP.  pp. 229-35.
____.  “Desire as Belief II”,Mind 105: 303-313.
Marks, Joel. 1982. &quot;A Theory of Emotion.&quot;Philosophical Studies 42: 227-242.
Millikan, Ruth. 1984.Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories.  MIT Press.
____. 1996. “Pushmi-pullyu Representations”, in James Tomberlin, ed.,PhilosophicalPerspectives vol. IX, Atascadero CA: Ridgeview Publishing, pp. 185-200.
Neu, Jerome. 2000.A Tear is an Intellectual Thing: the Meanings of Emotion. Oxford,
New York: Oxford UP.
Nussbaum, Martha. 2001.Upheavals of Thought: The Intelligence of Emotions.
Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
Pinker, Stephen.  1997.How The Mind Works.Norton.
Prinz, Jesse. 2004.Gut Reactions.  New York: Oxford UP.
Oakley, Justin. 1992.Morality and the Emotions. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Oatley, K. &amp; Johnson-Laird, P.N. 1987. “Toward a Cognitive Theory of the Emotions.”Cognition and Emotion, 1, 29-50.
Pansepp, Jaak.  2000. “Emotions as Natural Kinds With the Mammalian Brain.” In M.
Lewis &amp; J. Haviland-Jones (Eds.),Handbook of Emotions(2ns ed., pp. 137-56).New York:  Guilford Press.
Roberts, R.C.  1988.  “What an Emotion Is: A Sketch”.Philosophical Review, 97, 183-
209.
Robinson, J.  1983.  “Emotion, Judgment, and Desire”.Journal of Philosophy, 80, 731-
41.
Ryle, Gilbert. 1949.The Concept of Mind.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Solomon, Robert. 1999. &quot;The Philosophy of Emotions.&quot; InHandbook of Emotions, ed.
Mark Lewis and Jeannette Haviland-Jones, 3-15. New York: Guilford Press.Fisher 27
Sizer, Laura.  2000.  “Towards a Computational Theory of Mood.”British Journal forthe Philosophy of Science: 51. 743-69.
Skinner, B.F. 1962.Science and Human Behavior.  New York:  Free Press.
Stocker, Michael, with Elizabeth Hegeman. 1992.Valuing Emotions. Cambridge:
Cambridge UP.
Tappolet, Christine. Forthcoming. &quot;Irrational Emotions&quot;. InPerspectives onIrrationality&quot;, ed. Daniel Weinstock. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Watson, J.B. 1919.Psychology from the Standpoint of a Behaviorist.  Philadelphia:
Lippincott.
Wollheim, Richard. 1999.On the Emotions. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Wright, Ian, Aaron Sloman, and Luc Beaudoin. 1996. &quot;Towards a Design-Based Analysis
of Emotional Episodes.&quot;Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 3:101-126.
