Foundationalism and epistemic solace
Patrick Hawley
November 11, 2005
It is unreasonable to accept epistemological foundationalism, even if it is true.
This is so, I will argue, because a foundationalist cannot achieve something I call epistemic
solace. So all is lost for the foundationalist? Perhaps not: some views which survive my
argument may preserve the spirit of foundationalism.1
1
What is epistemic solace?
Chris put his two month old daughter to bed a few hours ago, and now he is getting ready
to go to bed himself. He has every reason to believe that his baby daughter is ﬁne. She is a
healthy girl. She looked ﬁne when he put her to bed. He hasn’t heard any strange noises.
Chris has no reason to think that anything is amiss. Still, he starts to wonder. Is she ok?
He needs to satisfy himself that she is indeed just ﬁne. So he enters her room, touches her
gently, hears her breathing. He sees that she is sleeping comfortably, peacefully. Reassured,
Chris goes to bed.
1Klein[16] defends a claim related to mine: even if foundationalism is true, it cannot solve the main
problem it is supposed to solve (the regress of reasons problem). Bergmann[1] answers Klein.
1Before checking on his daughter, Chris believes that she is ﬁne, and that belief, we can
assume, is very well justiﬁed. Yet, once he starts wondering whether she is ﬁne, it seems
perfectly reasonable of Chris to check on her. Even though Chris’s belief that she is ﬁne is
very well justiﬁed, it seems perfectly reasonable for him to reassure himself that she is ﬁne;
it seems perfectly reasonable for him to seek epistemic solace. In general, when wondering
whether one of her beliefs is true, a person gains epistemic solace if she ﬁnds some reason in
favor of that belief.
A belief is reasonable only if the believer can ﬁnd a reason in favor of that belief, when
wondering whether that belief is true. Or so I will argue. This is a very minimal requirement.
A believer is only required to be able to ﬁnd some reason or other—however weak—in favor
of a belief, and only in a special circumstance—when wondering whether that belief is true.2
Readers may already see why I think that it unreasonable for a theorist to believe in
foundationalism: a foundationalist theorist cannot achieve epistemic solace. If the theorist
wonders about her belief in foundationalism, she will be unable to ﬁnd a reason in favor of
that belief. But I probably I have not won you over yet. So I’d better present my case in
full. The ﬁrst step is to explain what foundationalism is. I’ll do that in the next section.
I must emphasize at the outset that my interest in these issues stems from broader
concerns. I am convinced that examining what we do with beliefs sheds light on traditional
epistemological questions. After all, we rely on our beliefs continually. This obvious fact,
I believe, can inform epistemological discussion. My suggestion here is that you need some
conﬁdence that you can rely on your beliefs; you need to be able to ﬁnd some minimal
reassurance that a belief is true, when wondering about it. I apply this suggestion to a test
case, the case of belief in foundationalism. This essay is but one element in a larger project
2The requirement is not that a believer be in a position to give a justifying argument for each of his beliefs.
The requirement is not that a believer be in a position to convince a doubter that her beliefs are true. Therequirement is not that a believer be able to produce whatever it is that makes her beliefs justiﬁed. Therequirement is not that a believer be justiﬁed in believing of each of his justiﬁed beliefs that it is justiﬁed.
2to examine epistemological issues by focusing on the role of belief in our lives.
2
Foundationalism
Foundationalism is in vogue in epistemology. Richard Feldman, James Pryor, and others
support a clever new version called “modest foundationalism”.[9][10][18][21] Even former
coherentist Laurence Bonjour now defends what he calls “traditional foundationalism”.[8]
It is helpful to abstract away from the complexities of particular theories, and describe
the elements common to all forms of epistemological foundationalism.
Foundationalism is a view about the structure of epistemic justiﬁcation. The clearest
way to explain this view is by way of the regress argument, its most common defense:
The foundationalist, noting that some of your beliefs are justiﬁed by beliefs,argues that not all of your beliefs are justiﬁed by beliefs. Otherwise (1) a beliefcould be justiﬁed by being part of a circular chain of beliefs, or (2) a belief couldbe justiﬁed by being part of an inﬁnite chain of beliefs, or (3) a belief could justifyitself, or (4) a belief could be justiﬁed by an unjustiﬁed belief. But (1) and (2)are out; being part of an inﬁnite or circular chain of beliefs does not make a beliefjustiﬁed. And (3) and (4) are out too. No belief justiﬁes itself, and no belief isjustiﬁed by an unjustiﬁed belief. So, assuming that at least one of your belief isjustiﬁed, at least one of your beliefs is basic—justiﬁed but not by beliefs.
The conclusion of the regress argument is the Bare Claim of foundationalism: at least
one of your beliefs is basic—justiﬁed but not by beliefs.
The Bare Claim is the central claim of foundationalism. Unsurprisingly, discussion of the
viability of foundationalism tends to center on the Bare Claim. Foundationalism’s critics
usually argue that the Bare Claim is false.[20][4][6] But to be clear: I will not argue that
the Bare Claim is false. My goal, as I said, is to argue that it is unreasonable to be a
foundationalist, even if foundationalism is true. I will assume, for the sake of argument, that
the Bare Claim is true. I will also assume, for the sake of argument, that your beliefs are
3(at least for the most part) justiﬁed.3
The Bare Claim is the conclusion of the regress argument, but the Bare Claim is clearly
not all there is to foundationalism. The Bare Claim on its own says little about the structure
of justiﬁcation. Even if the Bare Claim is true, all (but one) of your justiﬁed beliefs might
enjoy their status as justiﬁed in virtue of being part of a holistic structure of the sort posited
by some coherentists. The foundationalist view is not merely that some belief is basic, but
that every justiﬁed belief is either basic, or owes its status as justiﬁed, ultimately, to one or
more basic beliefs.4
The foundationalist view emerges from the regress argument. That suggests that we
characterize foundationalism in terms of the premises of the regress argument. Here are the
premises of one version of the argument:
R0. At least one of your beliefs is justiﬁed.
R1. No justiﬁed belief is part of a circular chain of justiﬁcation.
3Thus the problem of skepticism about justiﬁed belief is not a problem I will be concerned with here. See
[12] for an argument that at least some kinds of skepticism about justiﬁed belief can be rationally ignored.
4The foundationalist view of the structure of justiﬁcation is commonly modelled by a pyramid: basic
beliefs at the bottom (level 0), and beliefs on level n &gt; 0 justiﬁed by beliefs on level n − 1. A better modelis a directed acyclic graph. Here is an example of a directed acyclic graph:
b1
b2
b3
b4
b5
b6
b7
A graph is a ﬁnite non-empty set of vertices together with a set of edges connecting pairs of vertices. In a
directed graph, the edges are unidirectional. In this example, the edges are shown as arrows, and the verticesas labelled points. An acyclic graph contains no cycles—a path which begins and ends at the same vertex.
In this model of the structure of justiﬁcation, each vertex represents a justiﬁed belief. An edge from bj to
bi means that bi is justiﬁed (at least partly) by bj. If there is no edge to some vertex bk, then bk is justiﬁed,but not by beliefs; bk is a basic belief.
This model displays the Bare Claim quite clearly. A theorem of graph theory states that every directed
acyclic graph has at least one vertex with no incoming edges; there is always at least one basic belief.
4R2. No justiﬁed belief is part of an inﬁnite chain of justiﬁcation.
R3. No belief is justiﬁed by an unjustiﬁed belief.
R4. No belief justiﬁes itself.
What I will call Plain Foundationalism is the conjunction of R0, R1, R2, R3, R4, and
the Bare Claim.
Plain Foundationalism encompasses some views usually labelled “coherentist”. For ex-
ample, the holistic coherentist who says that a belief is justiﬁed if and only if it is a member
of a suﬃciently coherent set of beliefs, can accept R0-R4 and the Bare Claim, and count as
a Plain Foundationalist who believes that every justiﬁed belief is basic. However, the linear
coherentist who thinks that circular justiﬁcation is possible denies R1 and thus is not a Plain
Foundationalist.
2.1
Variants
Puzzled readers might wonder whether Plain Foundationalism captures the central commit-
ments of foundationalism. For example, some so-called foundationalists reject R4. They
think that basic beliefs justify themselves. Other so-called foundationalists reject R1. Al-
though they agree that circular chains do not suﬃce to confer justiﬁcation, they hold that
circular chains can heighten justiﬁcation.
These and other variant views can wait. It is easier to avoid complications and ﬁrst
present my argument in the case of Plain Foundationalism. After that, I will explain how
the argument applies to variant views.
One complication, however, cannot wait.
52.2
Ways of being justiﬁed
Importantly, Plain Foundationalists may distinguish diﬀerent ways for a belief to be epis-
temically justiﬁed. Some beliefs are justiﬁed by other justiﬁed beliefs. Let’s say that this
is to be justiﬁed in the regular way. (Sometimes this is called “inferential” or “mediate”
justiﬁcation.) However some beliefs are justiﬁed in another way. Basic beliefs are supposed
to be justiﬁed but not by other beliefs. Basic beliefs are justiﬁed in a basic way. (Sometimes
this is called “non-inferential” or “immediate” justiﬁcation.)5
Can a belief be justiﬁed both in the regular way and a basic way, at the same time?
Plain Foundationalism does not exclude this possibility. I’ll call such justiﬁed beliefs (beliefs
justiﬁed both in the regular way and a basic way) impurely justiﬁed beliefs, and reserve “basic
belief” for those justiﬁed beliefs which are justiﬁed only in a basic way.
Plain Foundationalism does not rule out the possibility of impurely justiﬁed beliefs. But
it is important to note that the conclusion of the regress argument, the Bare Claim, is that
at least one of your beliefs is a basic belief, a belief justiﬁed only in a basic way.6
5It is open to a Plain Foundationalist to hold that no beliefs are justiﬁed in the regular way.6This point is helpfully illuminated by a small addition to the directed acyclic graph model. Draw a circle
around every vertex which represents a belief justiﬁed in a basic way. Then every vertex with no incomingedge will have circle around it, and possibly some other vertices will have circles around them too, dependingon whether there are any impurely justiﬁed beliefs. For example:
b1
b2
b3
b4
b5
b6
b7
No matter where circles are added, there is still at least one vertex with no incoming edge; there is at
least one basic belief. Indeed, add further vertices, edges and circles where you like—as long as the graphremains acyclic, the theorem still holds: there is at least one vertex with no incoming edges. So there is atleast one basic belief. There is at least one basic belief even if some beliefs are justiﬁed both in the regularway and a basic way.
62.3
Two theories are better than one
So far I’ve stated what Plain Foundationalism is. But one thing it is not, is a full-blown
foundationalist theory. Plain Foundationalism leaves two key questions unanswered:
1. What sorts of beliefs can be justiﬁed in a basic way?
2. When a belief is justiﬁed in a basic way, what makes that belief justiﬁed?
A Full-Blown Foundationalist theory is composed of two theories: Plain Foundation-
alism, and a Basic Belief theory. Plain Foundationalism is a theory about the structure of
justiﬁcation. A Basic Belief theory is a theory about the nature of basic justiﬁcation. A
Basic Belief theory answers questions 1 and 2 above: it says what kinds of beliefs can be
justiﬁed in a basic way, and what makes them justiﬁed in that way. Here is an example
Basic Belief theory:
Beliefs about the external world (like the belief that there are hands) can bejustiﬁed in a basic way. What makes beliefs justiﬁed in a basic way is theirrelation to an experience of the proper sort. For example your belief that thereare hands is justiﬁed if it is appropriately related to an experience as of therebeing hands. Your belief that this paper is white is justiﬁed if it is appropriatelyrelated to an experience as of this paper being white.7
That is just one example of a Basic Belief theory. Plain Foundationalism is compatible
7This basic belief theory is related to a proposal by James Pryor:
For a large class of propositions, like the proposition that there are hands, it’s intuitively verynatural to think that having an experience as of that proposition justiﬁes one in believing thatproposition to be true... An experience as of there being hands seems to justify one in believingthere are hands in a perfectly straightforward and immediate way. When asked, “What justiﬁesyou in believing that there are hands?” one is likely to respond, “I can simply see that thereare hands.” One might be wrong: one might not really be seeing a hand. But it seems like themere fact that one has a visual experience of that phenomenological sort is enough to make itreasonable for one to believe that there are hands... [18, 536]
... whenever you have an experience as of p, you thereby have immediate prima facie justiﬁcationfor believing p.[18, 536]
Note that, unlike me, Pryor formulates his proposal in terms of propositional justiﬁcation rather than
doxastic justiﬁcation (that is he talks in terms of propositions you are justiﬁed in believing rather thanjustiﬁed beliefs). Note also that Pryor (and other modest foundationalists) think that the basic kind ofjustiﬁcation can be defeated. That’s why he adds the qualiﬁer “prima facie” in the second quote.
7with a wide range of views about the nature of basic beliefs. A stock reliabilist might say
that a belief is justiﬁed in a basic way in virtue of being formed by a reliable belief forming
process. Or one might say that rational intuition can make a belief justiﬁed in a basic way.
Or, like Gilbert Harman[11], one might say that every justiﬁed belief is justiﬁed in a basic
way. Harman thinks that the fact that you believe that p can make your belief justiﬁed.
And hybrid views, combining several proposals, are possible.
3
The Argument
Now it is time to present my argument. Stated more clearly now, the thesis I am defend-
ing is that it is unreasonable to accept a Full-Blown Foundationalist theory, even if Plain
Foundationalism is true. Here’s why.
Suppose you are a Full-Blown Foundationalist. You accept two theories, (1) Plain Foun-
dationalism, and (2) a Basic Belief theory, BB. BB is a theory which says which beliefs can
be justiﬁed in a basic way, and what makes them justiﬁed.
Assume that Plain Foundationalism is true. You believe that Plain Foundationalism is
true. You believe that BB is true. The following argument shows that your belief that BB
is true is unreasonable:
1. You can ﬁnd a reason to believe that your belief in BB is justiﬁed only if you can ﬁnd areason to believe that at least one basic belief supports your belief in BB.
2. You cannot ﬁnd a reason to believe that at least one basic belief supports your belief inBB, when wondering whether your belief in BB is justiﬁed.
3. You cannot ﬁnd a reason to believe that your belief in BB is justiﬁed, when wonderingwhether your belief in BB is justiﬁed. [from 1, 2]
4. If you cannot ﬁnd a reason to believe that your belief in BB is justiﬁed, when wonderingwhether your belief in BB is justiﬁed, then your belief in BB is unreasonable.
Conclusion. Your belief in BB is unreasonable. [from 3, 4]
83.1
Comment
3 follows from 1 and 2. The Conclusion follows from 3 and 4. So the premises to be defended
are 1, 2 and 4.
3.2
Premise 1
1. You can ﬁnd a reason to believe that your belief in BB is justiﬁed only if you can ﬁnd areason to believe that at least one basic belief supports your belief in BB.
Premise 1 is the least controversial of the three premises to be defended.
Consider the following valid argument:
(A) Your belief in BB is justiﬁed.
(B) If your belief in BB is justiﬁed, then at least one basic belief supports your belief in BB.
(C) At least one basic belief supports your belief in BB.
Suppose you can ﬁnd a reason to believe that your belief in BB is justiﬁed. That is,
you are in a position to ﬁnd some consideration or other, however weak, in favor of (A).8
Then—assuming that you can ﬁnd a reason to believe (B)—you can ﬁnd a reason to believe
that at least one basic belief supports your belief in BB.
You can ﬁnd a reason to believe (B). From Plain Foundationalism, it follows that if your
belief in BB is justiﬁed, then either your belief in BB is basic, or at least one basic belief
supports your belief in BB. It seems plausible that your belief in BB is not basic.9 If so,
then, (B) follows: if your belief in BB is justiﬁed, then at least one basic belief supports
8I intend “can ﬁnd a reason to believe that p” to mean “is able to come into cognitive possession of some
consideration or other, however weak, which you see as a consideration in favor of its being the case thatp.” That does not mean you are able to give a justifying argument in favor of believing that p. It does notmean that you are (or can become) justiﬁed in believing that you are justiﬁed in believing that p.
9The unusual suggestion that your belief in BB is basic can be handled by revising the ﬁrst two premises:
1*. You can ﬁnd a reason to believe that your belief in BB is justiﬁed only if you can ﬁnd a reason to believethat there is at least one basic belief.2*. You cannot ﬁnd a reason to believe that there is at least one basic belief, when wondering whether yourbelief in BB is justiﬁed.1* and 2* are arguably true for reasons similar to those I will give for the original premises.
9your belief in BB. So, since you are a Full-Blown Foundationalist, and assuming you have a
modicum of logical skill, you can ﬁnd a reason to believe (B).
Premise 1 is supported by a diﬃcult to deny epistemic closure principle: If you can ﬁnd
a reason to believe that p, and you can ﬁnd a reason to believe that if p then q, then you
can ﬁnd a reason to believe that q. Although some might ﬁnd this principle objectionable,
I think it best to turn to the more interesting, and more controversial, Premises 2 and 4.
3.3
Premise 2
2. You cannot ﬁnd a reason to believe that at least one basic belief supports your belief inBB, when wondering whether your belief in BB is justiﬁed.
Before defending Premise 2, I need to say something more about wondering.
3.3.1
Wondering
Recall the example of Chris the worried parent from the beginning of this paper. Chris
believes that his daughter is ﬁne. Then he starts wondering whether she is indeed ﬁne. As I
understand what it is to wonder, Chris does not stop believing that his daughter is ﬁne. Nor
does he doubt that his daughter is ﬁne. He simply asks himself whether what he believes
is true. Now for his wondering to be satisﬁed he needs to ﬁnd some reason in favor of the
belief; he needs to come into cognitive possession of some consideration or other, however
weak, which he sees as a consideration in favor of the belief. Chris went out and found some
reasons; he checked on his daughter. But wondering might also be satisﬁed by reasons you
have already. Sometimes you can just think for a moment and recall some reason in favor of
a belief.
Although reasons which satisfy wondering can be very weak, not just anything counts
as a reason. Suppose Chris thought to himself: “Hmm. Snow is white. So my daughter is
10ﬁne.” That is just irrelevant. The color of snow is irrelevant to whether Chris’s daughter
is ﬁne. Absent odd background beliefs connecting the whiteness of snow to his daughter’s
well-being, this should not reassure Chris that his daughter is ﬁne, while wondering whether
she is. Absent such odd background beliefs, this is not a reason for Chris to believe that his
daughter is ﬁne, while wondering whether she is.
Suppose instead that Chris thought to himself: “Hmm. My daughter is ﬁne. So my
daughter is ﬁne.” This is something else that will not reassure Chris, while wondering.
While wondering whether p, that p is no reason to believe that p.
Now, as we will see next, the reason why Premise 2 is true is that wondering whether
your belief in BB is justiﬁed excludes some things as reasons, which might normally count
as reasons.
3.3.2
Wondering about BB
Consider two example Basic Belief theories, to help focus the defense of Premise 2.
Basic Belief theory IA basic belief that p is justiﬁed in virtue of being appropriately related to an experience asof p. And the kinds of beliefs which can be basic are ordinary beliefs about the externalworld, like my belief that this paper is white, or that this cup is hot. When my belief thatthis cup is hot is basic, it is justiﬁed because I am having an experience as of this cup beinghot.
Basic Belief theory IIA basic belief that p is justiﬁed in virtue of a rational intuition that p is true. I believe thatnothing can be red all over and green all over at the same time. My belief is basic. My beliefis justiﬁed because, when I think about it, I see by the light of rational intuition that it istrue.10
Let us now see the eﬀects of wondering about a belief in such Basic Belief theories.
Here I am believing that this piece of paper is white. I ask myself, is my belief true? Is
this piece of paper white? I have a ready answer: “It looks white!”. That seems to be a
10This Basic Belief theory is based on some things Bonjour[7] says.
11reason to believe that this piece of paper is white.
Next, suppose that I am a Full-Blown Foundationalist, who accepts Basic Belief theory
I. I believe that this piece of paper is white. I ask myself, is my belief that this paper is
white justiﬁed? Again I have a ready answer: “It looks white!”. That seems to be a reason
for me to believe that my belief (that this piece of paper is white) is justiﬁed. Whether or
not it is a reason for me depends, in part, on what I think is required for a belief to have
the status of being justiﬁed. In this case I am a Full-Blown Foundationalist, who accepts
Basic Belief theory I. On this theory, that this paper looks white to me can make my belief
(that this paper is white) justiﬁed. If so, that it looks white to me is a reason for me to
believe that my belief (that this paper is white) is justiﬁed. (Even if I were not a Full-Blown
Foundationalist this might still be reason for me.)
But now suppose that I am not only a Full-Blown Foundationalist who accepts Basic
Belief theory I, I am currently wondering whether my belief in the Basic Belief theory is
justiﬁed. Let’s see whether I can ﬁnd a reason to believe that b is justiﬁed, where b is a basic
belief on which the justiﬁcation for my belief in the Basic Belief theory ultimately rests.
Assume, for concreteness, that b is my belief that this paper is white.11 I ask myself, is my
belief that this paper is white justiﬁed? My ready answer “It looks white!” is now defective.
I am wondering whether my belief in the Basic Belief theory is justiﬁed. I am wondering
whether my belief (that experiences can make beliefs justiﬁed) is justiﬁed. Insofar as this
is also to wonder whether experiences can make beliefs justiﬁed, the ready answer is clearly
defective. If I am wondering whether experiences can make beliefs justiﬁed, then it is not
legitimate to oﬀer an experience as a reason to believe that some belief of mine is justiﬁed.
For I am wondering whether experiences can make beliefs justiﬁed. Normally an experience
is a reason to believe some things. That this looks white to me is a reason for me to believe
11I pick a simple example that is easy to think about. It is not obvious what basic beliefs my belief in this
Basic Belief theory might actually rest on.
12that it is white. But the context of wondering whether experiences can make beliefs justiﬁed
is special. Wondering whether experiences can make beliefs justiﬁed excludes experiences as
reasons to believe that a belief is justiﬁed.
Similar points hold for Basic Belief theory II:
I believe that nothing can be red all over and green all over at the same time. I wonder
if this is true. I think to myself: “I can just see that it is true!”
Now I am a Full-Blown Foundationalist who accepts Basic Belief theory II. I wonder
whether my belief that nothing can be red all over and green all over at the same time is
justiﬁed. Again, I have a ready answer, “I can just see that it is true!” And that seems
suﬃcient, given my Full-Blown view that rational intuition can make beliefs justiﬁed.
Now I am wondering whether my belief in Basic Belief theory II is justiﬁed. Again, the
ready answer is unacceptable. Insofar as my wondering involves wondering whether rational
insight can make a belief justiﬁed, it is not legitimate to appeal to rational intuition as a
reason to believe that some belief is justiﬁed.
3.3.3
An argument for premise 2
So much for examples. Now here is an argument for premise 2.
Suppose b is basic belief. That is, b is justiﬁed but not justiﬁed by beliefs.
According to Full-Blown Foundationalism, one way for a belief to be justiﬁed is by beliefs.
Suppose you can ﬁnd a reason to believe that b is justiﬁed by beliefs. If so, then you can
ﬁnd a reason to believe that b is justiﬁed. But if you can ﬁnd a reason to believe that b
is justiﬁed by beliefs, you are not thereby able to ﬁnd a reason to believe that b is basic.
For basic beliefs are not justiﬁed by beliefs. Indeed, if you ﬁnd a reason to believe that b is
justiﬁed by beliefs, you will have found a reason to believe that b is not basic.
According to Full-Blown Foundationalism, another way for a belief to be justiﬁed is in a
13basic way. The Basic Belief theory part of Full-Blown Foundationalism countenances other
things (like experiences or intuitions) which can make a belief justiﬁed. Can you ﬁnd a
reason to believe that b is justiﬁed in a basic way? In some circumstances you can. In
some circumstances you can ﬁnd a reason to believe that b is appropriately related—for
example—to certain experiences, or intuitions. And, given your Full-Blown Foundationalist
commitments, that may mean that you can ﬁnd a reason to believe that b is basic. However,
as displayed in section 3.3.2, if you are wondering whether your belief in your Basic Belief
theory is justiﬁed, you can ﬁnd no reason to believe that b is justiﬁed in a basic way.
So we have now seen that if you can ﬁnd a reason to believe that b is justiﬁed by beliefs
you are not thereby able to ﬁnd a reason to believe that b is basic. And if you are wondering
whether your belief in your Basic Belief theory is justiﬁed, you can ﬁnd no reason to believe
that b is justiﬁed in a basic way. According to Full-Blown Foundationalism there is no other
way for a belief to justiﬁed other than the regular way (by beliefs) or a basic way. Therefore,
if you are wondering whether your belief in your Basic Belief theory is justiﬁed, you can ﬁnd
no reason to believe that b is basic.
One step further is needed to reach premise 2: If you can ﬁnd no reason to believe of
any basic belief supporting your belief in BB that it is basic, then you can ﬁnd no reason to
believe that at least one basic belief supports your belief in BB. Given this plausible step,
premise 2 follows: While wondering whether your belief in BB is justiﬁed, you can ﬁnd no
reason to believe that at least one basic belief supports your belief in BB.
There is now one last premise to defend.
3.4
Premise 4
4. If you cannot ﬁnd a reason to believe that your belief in BB is justiﬁed, when wonderingwhether your belief in BB is justiﬁed, then your belief in BB is unreasonable.
14This premise is supported by an example:
Suppose you believe that your cousin is in Miami. Then you start to wonder, is he really
in Miami? You can’t think of any reason to think so. You can’t remember why you started
believing that. You have no reason to think that you are particularly reliable about this
subject matter. You call up friends and relatives and get no evidence one way or the other.
You check the internet and learn nothing. You keep searching. You expend enormous energy
looking for a reason to believe that your cousin is in Miami. You ﬁnd no reason whatsoever.
In short, you fail to achieve epistemic solace. You believe that p, you wonder whether p,
and, while wondering, you fail to ﬁnd a reason to believe that p.12
It seems clear to me that in this situation it would be unreasonable for you to continue
believing that your cousin is in Miami. It is unreasonable, in this case, for you to continue
believing that p, because, while wondering whether p you tried hard and failed to ﬁnd a
reason to believe that p. This example supports the following principle:
(NEEDSOLACE) It is unreasonable for you to believe that p, if, while wondering whether
p, you can ﬁnd no reason to believe that p.
As I mentioned at the beginning of this paper, epistemic solace is what you achieve when,
while wondering whether p, you ﬁnd a reason to believe that p. What (NEEDSOLACE)
says is that it is unreasonable for you to hold a belief if you cannot achieve epistemic solace
about that belief. If (NEEDSOLACE) is correct, one more step will bring us to Premise 4:
(LINK) If it is unreasonable for you to believe that a belief is justiﬁed, then it is unrea-
sonable for you to hold that belief.
Premise 4 follows from (NEEDSOLACE), (LINK) and Premise 3. (I believe that (LINK) is
uncontroversial.) If Premise 4 is correct, then given the other Premises, the Conclusion fol-
lows. It is unreasonable to accept Full-Blown Foundationalism even if Plain Foundationalism
is true.
12This case is related to Bonjour’s[5] case of Norman the reliable clairvoyant. However, Bonjour uses his
case to argue that reliability is not suﬃcient for justiﬁcation. That is not my point here.
153.4.1
An objection
I argued on the basis of the Miami case that (NEEDSOLACE), and therefore Premise 4, are
correct. But an objector might hold that the Miami case does not show this. In the Miami
case, says the objector, my trying hard and failing to ﬁnd a reason to believe that my cousin
is in Miami gives me a reason to think that my cousin is not in Miami. If my cousin is there,
it should not be too hard to ﬁnd evidence that he is. That I cannot ﬁnd any evidence is thus
reason to think that there is no evidence to be found, because he is not there. The objector
agrees that in this case it would be unreasonable to believe that your cousin is in Miami, but
because you have reason to believe that he is not there, and not because (NEEDSOLACE)
is true.
The objection reveals the diﬃculty of providing a clear example in support of (NEED-
SOLACE). For it could be similarly claimed of any example that it smuggles in reasons to
believe that p is false. I believe that the Miami example makes (NEEDSOLACE) plausible.
But the result is not as clear-cut as one would have hoped. More investigation is needed.
Still, even if premise 4 is not true, I have raised a serious question for a Full-Blown
Foundationalist. Recall Premise 3:
3. You cannot ﬁnd a reason to believe that your belief in BB is justiﬁed, when wonderingwhether your belief in BB is justiﬁed.
According to 3, you cannot achieve epistemic solace about something, namely that your
belief in the Basic Belief theory is justiﬁed. This is very unsettling, even if it does not show
that your belief in the Basic Belief theory is unreasonable. Imagine that you realize that
you cannot ﬁnd any reason to believe one of your philosophical theories, while wondering
whether it is true. You should feel suspicious about your theory. You would consider giving
up your theory. Even if it is reasonable to keep believing your theory, there is certainly a
sense that something has gone wrong.
164
Scope of the argument
In presenting the argument I only considered two sample Basic Belief theories. As far as I
can tell, the argument applies to every form of Full-Blown Foundationalism; the choice of
Basic Belief theory does not matter for the argument. The key claim of the argument is that
you can ﬁnd no reason to believe that b is basic, while wondering. But, as far as I can tell,
that claim holds no matter what your Basic Belief theory.
In the argument, I assumed a thoroughgoing view, on which there is only one way for
a belief to be justiﬁed in a basic way. The argument also succeeds if you hold that there
is more than one way for a belief to be justiﬁed in a basic way. For example, suppose you
think that a belief can be justiﬁed in a basic way by its relation to experience, or a belief can
be justiﬁed in a basic way by its relation to a rational intuition. When you are wondering
whether belief in this complicated Basic Belief theory is justiﬁed, again you can ﬁnd no
reason to believe of some b that it is basic.13
Thus, I believe, the argument indeed shows that it is unreasonable to accept any form of
Full-Blown Foundationalism, even if Plain Foundationalism is true.
4.1
Some views which escape the argument
The argument does not show that it is unreasonable to accept Plain Foundationalism. A
theorist who holds Plain Foundationalism on its own has no Basic Belief theory to wonder
about. So the argument does not apply. Neither does the argument show anything wrong
with adopting views (like linear coherentism, or inﬁnitism) which reject the foundationalist’s
Bare Claim that there are basic beliefs. Again, holders of such views have no Basic Belief
13If you are wondering about only one half of this dual Basic Belief theory, a version of the argument can
work. The argument will succeed as long as when you can ﬁnd a reason to believe that your belief in thebasic belief theory is justiﬁed, then you can ﬁnd a reason to believe that there is at least one basic belief—ofthe kind you are wondering about.
17theory to wonder about.14
4.2
Variant views
Plain Foundationalism admits of variants, as I mentioned earlier. The argument of this
paper applies to some variants, but not all.
The argument applies to the variant view that says that circular (or inﬁnite) chains of
justiﬁcation can heighten justiﬁcation, but do not, on their own suﬃce for justiﬁcation. In
this case, even if you can ﬁnd reason to believe that b is part of a circular or inﬁnite chain
of justiﬁcation, you have found no reason to believe that it is basic.
The argument fails to apply to the variant view that says that circular (or inﬁnite) chains
of justiﬁcation are necessary for justiﬁcation, but do not, on their own suﬃce for justiﬁcation.
On this view, there are no basic beliefs, as I have deﬁned them (a belief justiﬁed, but not by
beliefs). So in this case, the ﬁrst step of the argument (if you can ﬁnd a reason to believe
that your belief in the Basic Belief theory is justiﬁed, then you can ﬁnd a reason to believe
that there is at least one basic belief supporting it) is faulty.
There are Mixed Foundationalist views according to which some justiﬁed beliefs are
justiﬁed in virtue of being part of the kind of structure the Plain Foundationalist suggests,
while other justiﬁed beliefs are justiﬁed in some other way. The argument works in this
case too, as long as the Mixed theorist believes that his belief in the Basic Belief theory is
one of the beliefs justiﬁed in virtue of being part of a foundationalist structure. Thus, the
argument does not apply, for example, if the Mixed theorist thinks that foundationalism
is correct about ordinary beliefs about the external world, but that linear coherentism is
correct about theoretical beliefs, like his belief in the Basic Belief theory.
14What would happen if you started wondering whether a belief can justify a belief? Or whether there are
any reasons to believe something? I believe that such wondering would not be coherent. Wondering involveslooking for a reason to believe. But if you are wondering whether anything can be a reason to believe, thenhow could you see yourself as looking for a reason to believe?
185
Epistemic solace elsewhere
The requirement that one be able to achieve epistemic solace while wondering can be applied
to other epistemological discussions. I will very brieﬂy mention one example (leaving a
detailed explanation for another occasion). Consider the following Moorean argument:15
1. I have hands.
2. If I have hands, then there is an external world.
C. There is an external world.
Does this argument show that there is an external world? Many people will not be
convinced. They will think that there is something wrong with the argument—it begs the
question against a skeptic, or something like that.
A defender of the argument might suggest that there is nothing wrong with this argument
per se, it is only ineﬀective dialectically. It could never be used to convince an opponent
who does not believe the conclusion. But still, the argument can provide me justiﬁcation for
believing the conclusion. I could be justiﬁed in believing the conclusion of the argument on
the basis of being justiﬁed in believing its premises. (Pryor[19] oﬀers a complex version of a
suggestion like this.)
This suggestion is interesting. However, a question about the Moorean argument remains.
Suppose I believe the conclusion; I believe that there is an external world. If I start wondering
whether what I believe is true, then I might hope the Moorean argument will reassure me
that I am correct. Unfortunately, I will be disappointed. For when wondering whether the
conclusion is true, premise 1 is (arguably) excluded as a reason to believe the conclusion.
And premise 2 on its own is not a reason to believe the conclusion. When wondering whether
there is an external world, this argument does not provide me epistemic solace.
There is much more to be said, but I will leave that for another time.
15For what Moore actually said (and did) see [17].
196
Concluding remarks
I have argued that it is unreasonable to accept Full-Blown Foundationalism, even if Plain
Foundationalism is true. In eﬀect, the reason why is that the Full-Blown Foundationalist
cannot ﬁnd a reason to believe the Basic Belief part of her theory, while wondering whether
the Basic Belief part of her theory is correct. Full-Blown Foundationalism’s failing is not
that it is false but that you cannot reassure yourself that it is true. As I noted, some theories
usually labelled “Coherentism” are also subject to this argument. Other theories about the
structure of justiﬁcation—notably linear coherentism, inﬁnitism and Plain Foundationalism
on its own—are not touched by my argument. Some forms of Mixed Foundationalism also
escape the argument.
The defense of this charge against Full-Blown Foundationalism revealed the importance
of epistemic solace. Not only do you want your beliefs to be justiﬁed, you want, in a very
minimal way, to be able to reassure yourself that a belief of yours is true when wondering
whether your belief is true. I’ve argued that a belief is reasonable only if, in some very
minimal way, you can reassure yourself that it is true, when wondering whether it is true; a
belief is reasonable only if you can achieve epistemic solace.
References
[1] Michael Bergmann. What’s not wrong with foundationalism. Philosophy and Phe-
nomenological Research, 68:161–65, 2004.
[2] Michael Bergmann. Epistemic circularity: malignant and benign. Philosophy and Phe-
nomenological Research, forthcoming.
20[3] Michael Bergmann. Is Klein an inﬁnitist about doxastic justiﬁcation? Philosophical
Studies, forthcoming.
[4] Laurence BonJour. Can empirical knowledge have a foundation? American Philosoph-
ical Quarterly, 15:1–13, 1978.
[5] Laurence BonJour. Externalist theories of empirical knowledge. Midwest Studies in
Philosophy, 5:53–73, 1980.
[6] Laurence BonJour. The Structure of Empirical Knowledge. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1985.
[7] Laurence Bonjour. In Defense of Pure Reason. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1998.
[8] Laurence Bonjour and Ernest Sosa. Epistemic Justiﬁcation: Internalism vs. External-
ism, Foundations vs. Virtues. Blackwell, Oxford, 2003.
[9] Richard Feldman. Epistemology. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2003.
[10] Richard Feldman. Foundational beliefs and empirical possibilities. Philosophical Issues,
14(1), 2004.
[11] Gilbert Harman. Skepticism and foundations. Ms., 2000.
[12] Patrick Hawley. Skepticism avoided. Ms., 2003.
[13] Daniel Howard-Snyder and E. J. Coﬀman. Three arguments against foundationalism:
Arbitrariness, epistemic regress, and existential support. Ms., 2004.
[14] Peter Klein. Human knowledge and the inﬁnite regress of reasons. Philosophical Per-
spectives, 13:297–325, 1999.
21[15] Peter Klein. The failures of dogmatism and a new pyrrhonism. Acta Analytica, 15.24:7–
24, 2000.
[16] Peter Klein. What is wrong with foundationalism is that it cannot solve the epistemic
regress problem. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 68:166–171, 2004.
[17] G. E. Moore. Proof of an external world. Proceedings of the British Academy, 25:273–
300, 1939.
[18] James Pryor. The skeptic and the dogmatist. Noˆ
us, 34:517–549, 2000.
[19] James Pryor. What’s wrong with Moore’s argument? Philosophical Issues, 14(1), 2004.
[20] Wilfrid Sellars. Empiricism and the philosophy of mind. In Science, Perception and
Reality, pages 127–96. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1963.
[21] Matthias Steup. Foundationalism, sense-experiential content, and Sellars’s dilemma.
Ms., 2001.
22
