Knowledge and Conversation
What is the relationship between knowledge and ‘knowledge’?  Can the
nature ‘knowledge’ and ‘knows’ shed any light on the nature of knowledge?  I
think not, but I do think that epistemology can learn from the philosophy of
language.  Here I propose that certain of our epistemological intuitions are the
result of a general phenomenon that results from the existence of certain
conversational implicatures.  In particular, the appeal of skepticism will be
explained by appeal to the fact that it would be conversationally inappropriate to
say that we know in skeptical contexts.  But this proposal, if correct, explains
away the motivation for views like contextualism and subject sensitive
invariantism, and suggests that the study of ‘knowledge’, in particular,will not
teach us anything useful for epistemology.
1. Moore’s insight
In 1949 Norman Malcolm published a paper accusing Moore of misusing
the word ‘knows’ in his lectures.1  It was Malcolm’s contention that ‘I know thatp’ could only meaningfully be uttered in a context in which doubt aboutp had
been expressed or suggested.  His argument for this claim was the fact that no
ordinary speaker would ever say ‘I know thatp’ unless doubt aboutp had been
expressed or suggested.  Moore’s use of ‘I know that I am standing up’ in his
lectures, then, was “senseless,” because no one in the audience had expressed or
suggested any doubt that Moore was standing up.  Malcolm’s paper purported to
show that the very thing Moore was appealing to – the absolutely certainty that he
was standing up, shared by himself and the audience – undermined his claim to
know.  Moore wrote a letter to Malcolm in reply:
1 Malcolm, N., “Defending Common Sense,” “Defending Common Sense,”Philosophical Review58:3 (1949), pp. 201-20
1If  a  person,  under  circumstances  in  which  everybody  would  seequite  clearly  that  a  certain  object  was  a  tree,  were  to  keeprepeatedly  pointing  at  it  and  saying  “That’s  a  tree”  or  “I  knowthat’s a tree,” we might well say that that was a senseless thing forhim to do, and therefore, in a sense, a senseless  thing for him tosay, [since] it could serve no useful purpose to say those words.2
But, Moore pointed out, there is another legitimate sense of the word
‘senseless’ on which it was simply false that the words ‘That’s a tree’ and ‘I know
that’s a tree’ were senseless, and that is presumably the sense in which Malcolm
intended to deny that Moore’s words had sense.  The first sense of ‘senseless’, as
Moore points out, is ‘purposeless’ or ‘pointless’, but the second sense of
‘senseless’ is ‘without linguistic meaning’, i.e. ‘nonsense’ or ‘gibberish’ – and
Moore’s point is obvious: while it is clear that the use of the words ‘That’s a tree’
and ‘I know that’s a tree’ were purposeless and pointless in the context described,
this does not entail or even suggest that they were without linguistic meaning.  In
fact, those words were in that context perfectly and obviously true – and this very
fact explains why they were in that context purposeless and pointless.
Malcolm’s argument, recall, was this:
No ordinary speaker would ever say ‘I know thatp’ unless doubtaboutp had been expressed or suggested.  Therefore, an utteranceof  ‘I  know  thatp’  is  meaningful  in  context  only  if  someone  hasexpressed or suggested doubt aboutp.Moore’s objection to this argument attacks its form; he offers an argument
with the same form but with absurd conclusion:
No ordinary speaker would ever say ‘p’ unless doubt aboutp hadbeen  expressed  or  suggested.    Therefore,  an  utterance  of  ‘p’  ismeaningful in context only if someone has expressed or suggesteddoubt aboutp.That is, although these is a sense in which ‘That’s a tree’ is senseless in
the context Moore describes, it would be crazy to think that this shows that
‘That’s a tree’ is meaningless in that context.3  In general it would be purposeless
2 Moore, “Letter to Malcolm,”Selected Writings (Routledge, 1993), pp. 213-16, at p. 215
3 Malcolm is, of course, not moved by the argument.  His original paper and his reply betray adenial of the distinction between truth in context and assertibility in context.  I have no argumentagainst the view that this distinction is illegitimate, but that it’s nuts.
2or pointless to say ‘p’ unless doubt aboutp had been expressed or suggestecd,
maybe, but this shows us nothing about the semantics of ‘p’.  Moore’s insight is
that Malcolm’s theory of ‘knows’ is false because it takes a general feature of
language to be a particular feature of knowledge attributions.
The general feature of language at work here is, of course, Grice’s maxim
of Quantity, which enjoins us to make our conversational contributions
informative, but not overinformative.  Given the fact that everyone can see the
tree and that it is a tree and given that they all are aware that Moore can see that
it’s a tree, Moore’s utterance of ‘That’s a tree’ and ‘I know that’s a tree’ violate
the maxim – neither utterance would be informative.4  We can imagine contexts in
which those claims would be appropriate, of course.  Suppose, first, that Moore is
leading a group of naïve botany students on a field trip, they are unsure whether
the plant they are looking at is a tree or a shrub; they ask, and he replies ‘That’s a
tree’.  Someone expresses skepticism about Moore’s competence as a botany
teacher, he reassures her: ‘I know that’s a tree’ (perhaps he continues, ‘A
professor of botany and I stood on this spot last week and he inspected it
thoroughly’.)
2. Puzzles for a theory of knowledge attributions
The phenomenon Moore describes – the inappropriateness of utterances of
‘That’s a tree’ and ‘I know that’s a tree’ in the context specified – is easily
accounted for in terms of the maxim of Quantity.  There are phenomena which
philosophers working on knowledge attributions have tangled with, and which
have inspired philosophers to propose the exciting thesis about ‘knows’ known in
Anglo-American epistemological circles ascontextualism.5  I will argue, below,
4 The maxim of Relation is relevant to this example too, if we suppose that the tree was not thesubject of conversation.
5 In his influentialLiteral Meaning (Cambridge, 2004), Francois Reçanati describes a view aboutlanguage in general called ‘contextualism’ which applies equally to what usually goes by the name‘contextualism’, to Schaffer’s contrastivism, and to subject-sensitive invariantism.  This sense of‘contextualism’ is common outside Anglo-American epistemological circles; it is probably themore common use of the term.
3that despite the excitement that these phenomena have caused, to deal with them
by giving anything but a Gricean explanation of the sort mentioned above is to
make the same mistake Malcolm made, and which Moore corrected.  Let us
consider two cases which exemplify the sort of linguistic behavior which has
inspired contextualists (and others):
I have been injured trying to defuse a roadside bomb; I know thatpeople with my sort of injury often receive hand amputations, andsometimes feet as well.  I am just waking up in the hospital and Ican’t  feel  anything.    You’re  two  beds  over,  full-body  cast,  andcan’t move.  You: ‘You awake?’  Me: ‘Yeah, I’m up’  You: ‘Didyou loose anything?’  Me: ‘I don’t know, hold on’  I pull my armsout from under the covers, and  see my fleshy mitts, a lot of cutsand burns, but definitely there.  I say: ‘I know I have hands’.Years  later  when  my  tour  is  over  I  take  a  class  in  epistemology.After listening to several lectures about evil demons and brains invats I feel uncertain about the world around me – what I took to beknowledge appears now like mere assumption.  After class one ofmy  fellow  students  asks:  ‘So,  do  you  think  you  know  you  havehands?’    I’m  suspect  that  I  don’tknow  much  of  anything,  so  Ishrug.  ‘I’m not sure’, I say.A  few  years  later  we’re  getting  on  the  A  train  and  you  ask  mewhether  it  stops  near  Grand  Sichuan.    Not  remembering  whetherthe  Grand  Sichuan  on  9th  Avenue  is  at  24th  or  34th,  but  confidentthat the train is making local stops, I  say: ‘I know it stops at 23rdStreet’.A  woman  wearing  a  helmet  and  Kevlar  vest  enters  the  car  andsays: ‘I need to get to 23rd Street to defuse a bomb that’s going toblow  up  the  city.    Does  anyone  know  whether  this  train  stops  at23rd Street?’  I say nothing.  But she’s spotted me.  ‘You, you looklike a man who knows where he’s going.  Do you know if this trainstops there?’  I say: ‘Um, I think it might, but I’m not sure’.Why was I so eager to say ‘I know’ in the hospital, and so reluctant in the
classroom?  Why was I so eager to claim knowledge when speaking with you, and
so reluctant with the woman from the bomb squad?  There is something right
about my linguistic behavior in these cases, something right about my claims to
know in the first and third story, and something right about my reluctance to make
such claims in the second and fourth story.  If these stories are unexceptional, we
4have a pattern of linguistic behavior that needs to be explained.  It submit that any
proposed explanation should be rated a success or a failure relative (at least) to
these desiderata:
1.
Our  theory  should  explain  my  willingness  to  claimknowledge in the first context, and my unwillingness inthe second.  In particular, our theory should explain why,in  the  second  context,  it  would  have  been  inappropriateto say ‘I know I have hands’.2.
The  same,  mutatis  mutandis,  for  the  third  and  fourthcontexts.
3.
Ceteris  paribus,  our  theory  should  give  a  charitableinterpretation of our utterances.
4.
Ceteris paribus, our theory should explain these patternsin  terms  of  general  features  of  language,  as  opposed  tofeatures which explain only these cases.
5.
Ceteris paribus, our theory should explain these patternsin  terms  of  features  of  language  that  we  are  alreadycommitted  to  the  existence  of,  as  opposed  to  positingnew features.
6.
Ceteris paribus, we should prefer a believable theory, i.e.we should prefer a theory that an epistemically virtuoussubject  would  prefer  were  she  in  our  position  (withrespect to evidence, background beliefs, etc.).6
Desiderata (3) – (6) are desiderata for linguistic theories in general.  Some
remarks are in order.  Desiderata (4) and (5) are consequences of the principle
known as ‘Grice’s Razor’ – a principle of parsimony deployed by Grice in
support of (simple) pragmatic explanations in terms of conversational implicature
as opposed to (complex) semantic explanations in terms of semantic ambiguity.
For example, Strawson had proposed that ‘and’ was semantically ambiguous – it
meant (in some contexts) the logical connective ‘&amp;’, but it could also mean (in
others) the temporally loaded ‘and then’.  In favor of this it was pointed out that it
would be inappropriate to describe an evening on which sensible Katie drove
6 If this desideratum sounds trivial, that’s good.
5home and then had a few too many nightcaps using these words: ‘Katie got drunk
and drove home’.7  Grice argued, against the proposal of semantic ambiguity, that
given the fact that in general we are enjoined by the maxim of Manner to “speak
orderly,” it would be inappropriate to describe the evening in that way simply
because one would have described the events in the wrong order and thereby
(since one’s audience should assume that one is not violating the maxim of
Manner) implicated that Katie drove drunk, when in fact she didn’t.
And, further, we can support this view by observing that you mightappropriately say ‘Katie got drunk and drove home, but not in that order’ and
therebycancel the implicature that your remark would have had if you had not
added the second clause.  Cancelability is a mark of a conversational implicature
(as opposed to a semantic implication, which would be required on Strawson’s
view).8
One can resist this conclusion about ‘and’ while agreeing with Grice that
there are maxims of the sort he describes that govern conversation, in general, and
that our conversations in general operate under the assumption that all speakers
are obeying them, for the most part, but by disagreeing with Grice about this
particular case.  That is fine; desiderata (4) and (5) are unthreatened.
One can also resist Grice’s conclusion by denying that there are any
maxims of Grice’s sort, and by maintaining, rather, that in general assertibility
and unassertibility track truth and falsity more closely than Grice thought.  I don’t
have any argument against this second way of disagreeing with Grice, which does
pose a threat to desiderata (4) and (5).  But I will say that this appears to make the
same mistake attributed to Malcolm earlier – that of assuming that what is
appropriately said must be true, and that what is inappropriately said must be false
or gibberish.
Desideratum (3) is also controversial.  It will not play a crucial role in
what follows so I will not comment on it any further.  Desideratum (6) says that
one’s background beliefs and current evidence should play a role in one’s
7 This example is due to Brian Weatherson.
8 This is so even if uncancelability is not a mark of semantic implication.  See Weiner, M., “AreAll Conversational Implicatures Cancelable?,”Analysis forthcoming.
6linguistic theorizing; ceteris paribus one should prefer a theory that fits with one’s
background beliefs and the evidence that one has.  Suppose we have two theories
about direction terms – ‘north’, ‘south’, ‘east’, ‘west’ – and that both explain all
our linguistic behavior equally well, and succeed equally well in terms of
simplicity and elegance, and are equally good theories in every respect except for
this difference: one theory maintains that ‘Baltimore is south of New York’ is
false, and the other maintains that ‘Baltimore is south of New York’ is true.
Consequently, the first theory has the consequence that Baltimore is not south of
New York, and the second theory has the consequence that Baltimore is south of
New York.  Desideratum (6) just says that it would be legitimate to prefer the
second theoryon the grounds that it fit better with our background beliefs – in
this case our geographical beliefs.9
So much, then, for the general desiderata (3) – (6).  Desiderata (1) and (2)
just state the problem.  Now the theories that we’ll consider – both those that I’ll
criticize and the one that I will defend – purport not only to explain the linguistic
behavior exemplified in the stories above, but also to tell us something relevant
for epistemology.  What those of us who grapple with these puzzles want – more
than just to correctly explain the way we talk – is to shed some light on the
traditional problems of epistemology.  So along with the linguisic desiderata (1) –
(6), we should rate our theories as successful or unsuccessful depending on how
they fare with respect of:
7.
The  problem  of  philosophical  skepticism  is  puzzling,paradoxical,  confusing.    Reasonable  philosophersdisagree  about  whether  skepticism  is  true;  no  seriousphilosopher  thinks  that  the  problem  isn’t  genuinelyperplexing.    Our  theory  should  be  consistent  with  thisfact, and it should explain it.8.
Epistemology  is  concerned  with  knowledge  andjustification.    If  a  theory  of  ‘knowledge’  and‘justification’  is  going  to  be  used  to  speak  to
9 One might want to qualify desideratum (6) – our background beliefs aboutX should not play apart in our scientific theorizing aboutX.  In particular one might want to say that our folklinguistics should have no bearing on linguistics; our ordinary beliefs about language are just toomessed up to matter.  That’s fine; it won’t come up in what follows.
7epistemological problems, it must be made explicit whythis is legitimate.10
So let us now consider some theories that have been proposed to explain
the patterns of linguistic behavior exemplified in the stories above.
3. Contextualism and subject-sensitive invariantism
By ‘contextualism’ I mean any one (or perhaps some conjunction) of the
following theses about ‘knows’ and cognates:
In  something  like  the  same  way  that  ‘tall’  and  ‘flat’  are  contextsensitive,  ‘knows’  and  cognates  are  context  sensitive.    Thesemantic value of ‘tall’ and ‘flat’ depends on the context in whichthese words are uttered.  Just as ‘tall’ might apply and not apply toone and the same person in different contexts, so ‘S knows thatp’might be true and false in different contexts, without any change inS or the relations between her andp.11In something like the same way that ‘tall enough’ and ‘flat enough’are context  sensitive, ‘knows’ and cognates are context sensitive.‘Knows’  and  cognates  are  elliptical,  requiring  context  to  fill  in  avariable.  Strictly speaking, ‘S knows thatp’ is better understoodas saying ‘S knows, given contextual variable C, thatp’.  ‘Knows’and cognates are, in some sense, indexicals.12In  something  like  the  same  way  that  ‘S  prefers  x’  is  contextsensitive,  ‘S  knows  thatp’  is  context  sensitive.    Preference  iscontrastive; an utterance of ‘S prefers x’ is true iff S prefers x tocontextually  salient  alternatives.    Similarly,  knowledge  iscontrastive; an utterance of ‘S knowsp’ if true iff S knows thatprather than contextually salient alternatives.  As a variant of this, Sknows thatp is the answer to some contextually salient question,rather than contextually salient alternatives.13
10 See Sosa, E., “Skepticism and Contextualism,”Philosophical Issues 10(2000), pp. 1-18
11 See, for example, Cohen, S., “How to be a Fallibilist,”Philosophical Perspectives 2 (1988), pp.91-123, DeRose, K., “Solving the Skeptical Problem,”Philosophical Review 104 (1995), pp. 1-52,and Lewis, D., “Elusive Knowledge,”Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74 (1996), pp. 549-67,reprinted in hisPapers in Metaphysics and Epistemology (Cambridge, 1999), pp. 418-43
12 See DeRose, K., “Assertion, Knowledge, and Context,”Philosophical Review 111 (2002), pp.167-203 and Kompa, N., “The Context Sensitivity of Knowledge Ascriptions,”GrazerPhilosophische Studien 64 (2002), pp. 1-18
13 See Schaffer, J., “From Contextualism to Contrastivism,”Philosophical Studies 119 (2004), pp.73-103
8
A few remarks.  First, all three of these views are explicitly semantic
theses, views about the literal meaning of sentences involves ‘knows’ and
cognates.  Second, all three of these views – I’ll grant – satisfy desiderata 1 and 2.
Third, all three of these views can be made to satisfy desideratum 3.
Fourth, as Ernest Sosa has pointed out, all three of these views absolutely
fail to satisfy desideratum 8.14  If I am worried that no one loves me, it will not
ease my lonliness to learn that in some contexts of utterance, ‘I love you’ is true.
What I want is for someone to love me.  Similarly, if I am worried that I know
nothing, it will not relieve my skeptical doubt to learn that in some contexts of
utterance, ‘I know’ is true.  What I want is to know, and learning that in some
contexts ‘I know’ is true doesn’t tell me anything about that unless I learn thatthis
is one of those contexts.  Fifth, it is not clear that any of these positions can satisfy
desideratum 7.  Although Unger tells a story about becoming convinced that
nothing is flat, in general competent users of language are able to navigate
contexts with enough success so as to avoid the sort of confusion thatdoes occur
when we think about knowledge.
At least one of these objections does not apply against contextualism’s
cousin, known as ‘subject sensitive invariantism’.  The ink is still wet on the most
recent statements of subject sensitive invariantism; here my concern is not to give
an exposition of the literature, so, without a great deal of regard for other’s use of
the expression, by ‘subject sensitive invariantism’ I will mean the view that
knowledge is a three-place relation between a person, a proposition, and the
person’s circumstances.  Inspired by cases like the bomb squad example above,
the defender of subject sensitive invariantism points in particular to the pragmatic
or prudential circumstances.  Where contextualists spoke ofstandards (relative to
which knowledge-attributors made their attribuitions), the subject sensitive
14 Sosa, op. cit.
9invariantist speaks ofstakes.  When the stakes are high, knowledge is difficult to
attain; when low, knowledge is easier to attain.15
A few remarks.  First, subject sensitive invariantism is a thesis about
knowledge, not about knowledge attributions.  But as the name ‘invariantism’
suggests, it is naturally taken to involve a commitment to the view that ‘knows’
denotes the aforementioned three-place relation, and so it would appear that we
can easily give explanations of some of the behavior that generates our puzzles.
In low stakes contexts I know; in high stakes contexts I don’t, so there is no
puzzle that Isay that I know in low stakes contexts and am hesitant to say that I
know in high stakes contexts.16  So, second, let us assume that subject sensitive
invariantist can meet desiderata 1 and 2.  And third, as above, desideratum 3 is no
problem.
Fourth, since subject sensitive invariantism is a thesis about knowledge,
there is no problem how it satisfies desideratum 8.  However, fifth, Desideratum 7
remains unfulfilled – as far as I can tell.
Contextualism and subject sensitive invariantism agree on this: my
ordinary knowledge claims are true, and this explains why I am happy to make
them, but context and/or cicumstance has the power to erode knowledge – the
reason I am hesitant to claim knowledge in the second and fourth contexts above
is that to do so would be to say somethingfalse.17  This appears to be a significant
concession to skepticism; and it is one that, in the context of skepticism, is
equivalent to skepticism.  It would appear that both the contextualist and the
subject sensitive invariantist are prepared to side with the skeptic in saying that
we do not know much of anything.  My intention in including desideratum 6 was
to ensure that the fact that contextualism and subject sensitive invariantism have
15 See Fantl and McGrath, “Evidence, Pragmatics, and Justification,”Philosophical Review111:1(2002), pp. 67-94, Hawthorne, J.,Knowledge and Lotteries (Oxford, 2003), and Stanley, J.,Knowledge and Practical Interests (Oxford, forthcoming).
16 This is not obvious; in what sense are the pragmatic and prudential circumstances relevantlydifferent at the philosophy lecture, as compared to the hospital?  See footnote 17.
17 One might endorse a subject sensitive invariantism on which skeptical contexts are not ‘highstakes’ contexts, and so on which we do know in such contexts.  I have no problem with such aview; my concern here, however, is in part with our reluctance to claim knowledge in skepticalcontexts.  My proposal below will cover both cases described above.
10this consequence is a mark against them.  As Moore would have said, it is more
certain that I do know that I have hands, than that any one of your semantic and/or
epistemological theories are true.
4. The Gricean explanation
However, let us not be sidetracked by such considerations.  There are
decisive reasons against contextualism and subject sensitive invariantism, given
the desiderata proposed, when we compare them with my own preferred theory of
knowledge attributions. Here it is.18
First, the meaning of ‘knows’ and cognates is invariant, and the relation
that ‘knows’ and cognates denote is a two-place relation between a person and a
proposition.  Second, the relation that ‘knows’ and cognates denote is such that a
great many ordinary knowledge attributions are true.  Substitute your favorite
anti-skeptical analysis of knowledge.  I prefer one on which knowledge is reliable
belief, i.e. S knows thatp iff S’s belief thatp was formed and is sustained in a
reliable way.  I’ll use this account of knowledge in what follows, but nothing will
hinge on the selection of this anti-skeptical account, as opposed to any other.
What will be crucial in the argument that follows is that (1) a fallible belief can
amount to knowledge, i.e. someone can know thatp even if they haven’t ruled out
(contextually salient) possibilities thatp, (2) someone can know thatp without
being able to give a proof or cogent argument thatp, (3) someone can know thatp
despite its being possible for her to get more epistemic justification for her belief
thatp than she already has.  On my reliabilist account, these three conditions are
met, because (1) reliability is not infallibility, (2) reliability has nothing to do with
one’s dialectical or argumentative powers, and (3) reliability comes in degrees; a
belief can be reliable without being maximally reliable.
18 See Grice, H.P., “Skepticism and Common Sense,” inStudies in the Way of Words (Harvard,1989), pp. 147-53, Rysiew, P., “The Context-Sensitivity of Knowledge Attributions,”Noûs 35:4(2001), pp. 477-514, Schaffer, J., “Skepticism, Contextualism, and Discrimination,”Philosophyand Phenomenological Research 69 (2004), pp. 138-55, and Hawthorne, J., “The Case forClosure,” Steup and Sosa (eds.),Contemporary Debates in Epistemology(Blackwell, 2005), pp.26-43.
11
One might object that if ‘justified in believing’ is context sensitive, then
‘knows’ is as well, since justification is a component of knowledge.19  Since
‘reliable’ is beyond question context sensitive, if this thought is right, then
‘knows’ is context sensitive as well and my claim that ‘knows’ has invariant
meaning is false.  But this idea is wrong.  In general, if ‘e’ and ‘g’ are
expressions, ande is a component ofg (we might say: the concept ofg contains
the concept ofe), it does not follow that if ‘e’ is context sensitive, so is ‘g’.  ‘Tall’
is context sensitive; ‘tall enough to guard Shaq’ isn’t.20  ‘Reliable’ is context
sensitive, but that does not provide a reason to believe that ‘knows’ is, even given
that reliability is a component of knowledge.
So much for the semantics of ‘knows’.  The puzzling behavior is to be
explained, on my view, pragmatically.  First, we need to clarify how Grice’s
maxims govern speech acts.  Above I appealed to the maxim of Quantity to
explain the inappropriateness of the utterances in Moore’s example.  But in fact,
no inappropriateness of this kind can ever be explainedmerely by an appeal to the
maxim of Quantity.  The maxim says ‘Be informative, but not overinformative’.
But why is ‘That’s a tree’ or ‘I know that’s a tree’ overinformative?  These
utterances are true, they provide true ‘information’, it is just information already
had by the parties to the conversation.  Is the utterance of sentences expressing
propositions already believed by one’s interlocheters sufficient for violating the
maxim?  No, perhaps one is reminding someone of the relevance of some fact that
she is not attending to.  Nor is uttering sentences expressing propositions not
believed by one’s interlocheters sufficient for not violating the maxim.  It is
inappropriate to inform strangers about the color of your underwear, even though
this would inform them of something they were previously ignorant of.  To be
informative one must provide informationrelevant to the conversation.
Judgments of informativeness and overinformativeness can only be made given
knowledge of what is relevant for the conversation and for the parties involved.
19 See Cohen, S., “Contextualism Defended,” in Steup and Sosa (eds.),Contemporary Debates inEpistemology (Blackwell, 2005), pp. 56-62
20 That is, whatever context-sensitivity the expression has in not ‘inherited’ from the contextsensitivity of ‘tall’.
12In this way, the maxim of Quantity operates always in conjunction with the
maxim of Relation, which says ‘Make your contribution to a conversation
relevant’.
It is clear that my utterances of ‘I know I have hands’ and ‘I know that this
train stops at 23rd Street’ are informative and relevant in the first and third
contexts mentioned above.  In the first, a question has been posed about my
condition, parties to the conversation are wondering – have my hands been
amputated or not?  In the second, again a question has been posed, and parties are
unsure of the answer – does this train stop near the restaurant or not?  In the
second case my utterance is less informative than, perhaps, my interlocheter
would like, but it is informative after all – if she knows which street the restaurant
is on, she will have all the information she needs.
However, if I were to utter ‘I know I have hands’ in the second context, it
would not be informative because it would be irrelevant to the conversation.  We
have been discussing the possibility that we are victims of a deceptive demon.
We have been wondering:
(i)
Can that possibility be ruled out?
(ii)
Can we prove or cogently argue that we are not deceived?
(iii)
Can we be sure that we’re not?
And so on.  If, in a conversation in which these questions are salient, I
utter a sentence which affirms the reliability of my belief that I have hands, would
this be relevant to the conversation?  What about a sentence that affirms that I do
have hands?  In such a conversation it is evident to all parties that I have hands
and that I have a reliable belief about them.  Our concern is with the possibility of
deception – can it be ruled out, can we give any argument that such a possibility
isn’t actual, and can we be sure that we’re not victims of a demon?  The fact that I
have hands and know it, though incompatible with the possibility that I’m
deceived by an demon, is irrelevant to questions (i) – (iii), because of points (1) –
(3) above.  To know that you have hands is not the same thing as, nor does it
require, being able to rule out the possibility that you’re handless and deceied, or
being able to prove or argue that you’re not deceived, or being sure or certain that
13you’re not deceived.  As noted above, an anti-skeptical account of knowledge is
one on which knowledge does not involve any of these things.  Knowledge can be
fallible, knowledge requires no proof or argument, and knowledge does not
require sureness – one could be less than certain thatp and still know thatp.
 So one could legitimately wonder about the possibility of demon
deception, and whether one could rule it out, or give an argument against it, and
ask oneself whether or not one could be sure or certain that one is not deceived by
a demon, but the fact that one knows that one has hands would be completely
irrelevant to these questions, as would the claim that one has hands.  Since these
claims would be irrelevant, they would be uninformative (despite being true).
They are forbidden by the maxims of Quantity and Relation.
Notice that we are able to explain both the inappropriateness of ‘I know I
have hands’ in this contextand the inappropriateness of ‘I have hands’.  Consider
this for a moment.  ‘I have hands’ is no more appropriate in this context then is ‘I
know I have hands’; we are no more compelled to respond to skeptical doubts
with ‘I have hands’ than with ‘I know I have hands’.  If my proposal is correct,
we have an explanation of this, and the reason for the inappropriateness of both
utterances is the same – to utter these things would violate the rules of
conversation.  On the contextualist’s account, the consideration of demon
possibilities changes the semantic value of ‘knows’ so that it becomes false to say
‘I know I have hands’.  But what about ‘I have hands’?  Which expression in ‘I
have hands’ could change in that way?21  Could it be that the semantic value of ‘I
have hands’ changes in skeptical contexts so as to become false?  Wittgenstein
may have maintained the opposite; that only when there is doubt about whether
one has hands does an utterance of ‘I am here’ have meaning.  Consider:
[T]he words “I am here” have a meaning only in certain contexts,and not when I say them to someone who is sitting in front of meand  sees  me  clearly,  –  and  not  because  they  are  superfluous,  but
21 The contextualist and the subject sensitive invariantist may appeal, at this point, to the thesisthat ‘knowledge is the norm of assertion’.  See Williamson, T.,Knowledge and its Limits(Oxford,2000), Chapter 11, and Hawthorne, J.,Knowledge and Lotteries, cited above.  While I admit that,in general, and ceteris paribus, one ought only assert what one knows, I do not see the appeal ofthe stronger thesis.  For a critique, see Weiner, M., “Must We Know What We Say?,”Philosophical Review forthcoming.
14because  their  meaning  is  notdetermined  by  the  situation,  yetstands in need of such determination.22
Suppose that Wittgenstein means here that ‘I am here’ is meaningless
when spoken to someone who is sitting right in front of you and sees you clearly.
The evidence that might be cited in favor of this view, of course, is the fact that
one would never say ‘I am here’ if she were sitting in front of someone who could
see her clearly, just as we might support the proposal we are now considering –
that ‘I have hands’ changes semantic value in the context o skepticism – by
pointing to the fact that one would normally never say ‘I have hands’ in that
context.  Both these proposals are easily rejected if one adopts a modest Gricean
framework on which uninformative and irrelevant utterances are in general
forbidden.  But it is that same modest Gricean framework that explains why we
are hesitant to say that we know in the context of skepticism.  Once we see that
the phenomenon described in the puzzle cases is just an instance of the general
phenomenon of the governance of conversation by something like Grice’s rules,
there is no need to posit the additional semantic machinery of the contextualist,
nor to suppose that knowledge is anything but what it appears to be: a two-place
relation between a person and a proposition.
 Can the same account be given to explain the subway case?  It can.23  The
woman from the bomb squad needs more than knowledge of your reliable belief
that the train stops at 23rd Street, she needs certainty, she needs you to have
checked for sure that the train is not an Express.  And this you have not done.
The only way your knowledge could be relevant would be if youhad checked and
ruled out the possibility that the train is an Express, if youdid know forsure.
This is why the train driver’s knowledge would be relevant while yours is not.
And that is why the train driver could say, were she asked, ‘This train stops at 23rd
Street’ and ‘I know this train stops at 23rd Street’.  Note, again, utterance of ‘p’ is22 Wittgenstein,On Certainty (Harper, 1969), p. 44 (§348)
23 Suppose not.  The Gricean framework defended here does a better job with the data concerningskeptical contexts; these are my primary concern.  If the subject sensitive invariantist is right about‘high stakes’ cases, but has nothing to say about skepticism, then I am unperturbed.
15just as inappropriate here as utterance of ‘I know thatp’.  The Gricean account
provides a perspicuous explanation of that fact.
So much for desiderata 1 and 2.  The Gricean account is, by some
measure, less successful with respect of desideratum 3 than are contextualism and
subject sensitive invariantism.  But it should be noted thatanyaccount of
apparently contradictory linguistic behavior that says it’s not really contradictory
is going to have the virtues of contextualism and subject sensitive invariantism in
this way.  Some people tend to say ‘Abortion is murder’, other people tend to say
‘Abortion is not murder’.  A view on which ‘murder’ is semantically ambiguous
is more charitable than a view that says the dispute over abortion is ethical and
not a linguistic confusion.24  What this shows is that charity is not the whole story;
ceteris paribus we should prefer a more charitable theory to a less charitable one,
but in this case ceteris isn’t paribus.25  The Gricean account succeeds in fulfilling
the remaining desiderata better or at least as well as the competitors.
Desideratum 4 enjoins us to prefer theories which explain our linguistic
behavior in terms of general features of language, and the Gricean account just
presented does just that – the puzzling behavior involving knowledge attributions
is just an instance of the fact that in making any utterance a speaker, whether she
is making a knowledge attribution or some other kind of utterance, is enjoined by
Grice’s maxims to be informative and relevant, and not overinformative or
irrelevant.  As well, accounts of linguistic phenomena in terms of Grice’s maxims
are superior to semantic accounts with respect of desideratum 5 – we are
antecedently committed to the maxims’ governance of our linguistic behavior, so
the Gricean account posits nothing new.26  The contextualist and subject sensitive
24 See Feldman, R., “Contextualism and Skepticism,”Philosophical Perspectives 13 (1999), pp.91-114 and “Skeptical Problems, Contextualist Solutions,”Philosophical Studies 103 (2001), pp.61-85
25 But when ceteris is paribus, let charity reign.  So see, and reject, the proposals about ordinaryknowledge claims in Schaffer, op. cit., and Grice, op. cit.
26 In “Contextualism: An Explanation and Defense,” Greco and Sosa (eds.),The Blackwell Guideto Epistemology (Blackwell, 1999), pp. 185-203, at p. 200, Keith DeRose imagines a pragmaticcompetitor to his contextualism, a “warranted assertibility maneuver” to explain our varied use of‘knows’. But he contends that this view isad hoc – no more plausible than saying that our varieduse of ‘bank’ is the result of special pragmatic rules rather than semantic ambiguity.  But thiscriticism does not apply to the Gricean proposal.  My explanation of our varied use of ‘knows’
16invariantist, by contrast, complicate the semantics for ‘knows’ and cognates, since
we should admit that ‘knows’ appears – before we start considering the puzzling
behavior, say – to have invariant meaning and to denote a two-place relation.27  If
we can explain the puzzling behavior without abandoning the hypothesis that
‘knows’ does have invariant meaning and that ‘knows’ does denote a two-place
relation, we should do so.  Thus the Gricean account is superior in terms of
parsimony, viz. desideratum 5.
Above I criticized contextualism and subject sensitive invariantism,
challenging their ability to fulfill desideratum 6.  I will note here only that the
Gricean account proposed fulfills desideratum 6, for an epistemically virtuous
subject is no skeptic, and so will be happy with a theory on which we do have
knowledge.  The anti-skeptical epistemologist will admit this, and the refutation
of skepticism is not my business here.
So, on my view, it is inappropriate to claim knowledge, in the context of
skepticism, because your utterance would be not be informative, because it would
be irrelevant.  But isn’t the skeptic – with whom we may imagine we are
conversing – challenging our knowledge?  Isn’t she suggesting (though falsely)
that we don’t know?  How could it be irrelevant or uninformative to tell her that
we do indeed know, if it’s true that we know?  The skeptic offers arguments that
we don’t know, and we are not allowed to say that we do, because it would be
irrelevant?  But knowledge is what’s being discussed, isn’t it?  How could a claim
to know be irrelevant to a discussion about knowledge?
My reply is this.  Suppose someone falsely believes that it would take
someone at least ten feet tall to reach the cookie jar.  She’s trying to convince us
that reaching the jar is humanly impossible.  She gives a bunch of arguments,
some of them more compelling than others, that reaching the jar is beyond our
ability, but in the end we’re not convinced.  In fact, we know that some peoplewas in completely general terms.  Nothing special about ‘knows’ was appealed to, only ourgeneral conformity with the maxims of Quantity and Relation (see Rysiew, op. cit., p. 291).DeRose is right that it would be illegitimate to positnew pragmatic machinery to deal with‘knows’ as a way of avoiding contextualism.  But I have no posited new machinery.
27 For linguistic evidence that ‘knows’ is not context sensitive, see Stanley, J., “On the LinguisticBasis for Contextualism,”Philosophical Studies119 (2004)
17can reach the jar, for example, anyone over six feet tall.  Suppose she says: ‘Who
can reach the cookies?  No one!  No human has height enough to reach them!’
She knows how tall I am – six foot one – but doesn’t think that I can reach the
cookies.  Would it be informative and relevant, if we were asked by this skeptic
about cookie-reaching whether anyone could possibly reach the cookies, to
respond: ‘I can reach them’?  No.  For one, the skeptic already knows that I’m six
foot one, and for another, this information is useless to her.  Her problem is not
that she doesn’t know how tall people are in general; her mistake is not realizing
that the cookies are within our reach.  But in all this, the expression ‘can reach the
cookies’ is invariant (at least, it’s invariant against the background of
conversations about these particular cookies), and my utterance ‘I can reach
them’, though inappropriate in the circumstances, would be perfectly and literally
true.
Just as the skeptic about cookie-reaching is mistaken about what is
required to reach the cookies, the skeptic about knowledge is mistaken about what
is required to know.  She thinks it requires the ability to rule out (contextually
salient) alternatives, or the ability to prove or argue cogently that the external
world is real, or certainty.  But she’s wrong.  And on account of her error, we are
unable to state the plain truth – that we know – without violating the maxims of
Quantity and Relation.
But this applies generally and systematically to contexts in which broadly
skeptical concerns are salient (regardless of whether some individual, ‘the
skeptic’, is trying to appeal to those concerns in an argument whose conclusion is
that we don’t know).  As with Moore’s ‘That’s a tree’ and ‘I know that’s a tree’,
to say ‘I know’ in these contexts would be purposeless and pointless.  Let us
consider again the context described in the first puzzle case above – a discussion
about the possibility of deception.  What parties to the conversation are looking
for are answers to questions (i) – (iii).  Now one way you might inform someone
that you have an answer to one of these questions would be to say ‘I know I have
hands’.  It is not as if knowledge hasnothing to do these questions.  Knowledge is
reliable belief; one who knows thatp has discriminatory abilities that ensure that
18her belief thatp is probably true.28  Do these discriminatory abilities involve the
ability to rule out some contextually salient possibility incompatible withp?  Is S
capable to giving an argument that might impart her discriminatory abilities to her
interlocheters?  Is S certain thatp is true?  Depending on the specifics of the
skeptical context, ‘S knows thatp’ is a perspicuous way of letting the other parties
know that the answer to one or more of these question is ‘Yes’.
Given this, an utterance of ‘S knows thatp’ in such a context has one or
more of the following conversational implicatures:
(I)
S’s  belief  thatp  is  infallible  (with  respect  of  relevantalternatives),  viz.  she  can  rule  out  all  contextually  salientpossibilities incompatible withp.(II)
S can prove or cogently argue thatp, in the current context.
(III)
S is justifiedly sure or certain thatp is true.As I noted above, cancelability is a mark of conversational implicature.
Stewart Cohen rejects the tenability of the kind of proposal I make here on the
grounds that the implicature from ‘S knows thatp’ to (I) is not cancelable. Since
all conversational implicaturesare cancelable, it follows that the pragmatist’s
supposed conversational implicature is not in fact one.29  The data that support the
uncancelability of the pragmatist’s supposed implicature are stated well by Lewis:
If you claim thatS knows thatP, and yet you grant thatS cannoteliminate a certain possibility in which not-P, it certainly seems asif you have granted thatS does not after all know that p.  To speakof  fallible  knowledge,  of  knowledge  despite  uneliminatedpossibilities of error, justsounds contradictory.30Now one route the Gricean might go at this point would be to accept that
her favored implicatures are not conversational, but propose that they are
conventional.  For conventional implicatures are not cancelable.  But this will not
28 Cf. Schaffer, “Skepticism, Contextualism, and Discrimination,” cited above.  Note that ‘Sknows thatp’ says more than ‘p’ – while saying ‘p’ perhaps implicates that one has the relevantdiscriminatory ability, ‘S knows thatp’ makes it explicit.  It is this additional force of ‘S knowsthatp’, as opposed to ‘p’, that generates the conversational implicatures mentioned below.29 Cohen, S., “Contextualism, Skepticism, and the Structure of Reasons,”PhilosophicalPerspectives 13 (1999), pp. 57-89, at p. 60.  See Weiner, “Are All Conversational ImplicaturesCancelable?,” cited above, for critique of the principle Cohen appeals to.30 Lewis, op. cit., p. 419
19do – for to suppose some special conventional rules make it such that ‘S knows
that p’ implicates that S has ruled out various salient possibilities makes the
Gricean’s proposal a poor candidate for assistance from Grice’s Razor.  That
principle prefers simple explanations that positno new machinery; but to suppose
that some convention surrounds ‘knows’ is to posit just the sort of machinery that
Grice’s Razor enjoins us to avoid.
I think that the implicature from knowledge to elimination of salient
alternative possibilities is cancelable, but I think it is difficult to cancel it.  One
has to do some epistemology to see how one might know without certainty,
without elimination of all logical alternative possibilities, and without the ability
to give proof or argument.  But you can do it, if you are an anti-skeptical
epistemologist.  Consider the claims Moore made, that Malcolm criticized.  In
“Proof of An External World” Moore is explicit that hedoes not mean his claims
to know to commit him to having ruled out the possibility that he is dreaming.31
And he makes this point because he recognizes that some of his audience may
think that his claims to know commit him to having ruled that possibility out.  “I
cannot prove that I am not dreaming,” Moore says, “I can know things, that I
cannot prove.”32  If one is explicit in this way, one can truthfully state the difficult
conjunctions known as ‘concessive knowledge attributions’.
But even if one could not, we have in hand machinery to explain why it
sounds awful to say ‘S knows that she has hands, but can’t eliminate the
possibility that she’s handless and deceived by an evil demon’.  The second clause
immediately cancels an implicature that the first clause has.  It sounds like the
speaker is messing with us (Dretske calls it “verbal hocus pocus”).  Compare this
to: ‘There’s beer in the fridge, but it’s just a few milliliters spilt in the crisper’.
Not false, but never assertible without being cute.  In a ‘high stakes’
context in which a doctor is needed to save someone’s life, it would quite awful to
say: ‘I’m a doctor – I’ve got a PhD in philosophy’.  Concessive knowledge
attributions sounds contradictory.  But they aren’t.  The reason that they sound31 Moore, “Proof of an External World,”Selected Writings, cited above, pp.147-70, p. 169
32 Ibid. p. 170
20contradictory is that they so swiftly cancel an implicature that their first clause so
obviously has in context.33  Some might respond that when we do philosophy we
always cancel these implicatures, we agree to speak plainly and literally, we do
not flout Quality.34  But Ithink that when we really get serious and ask ourselves
whether we know, we will say what Moore said.  We will affirm that we really do
know.35
5. Fulfilling the epistemological desiderata
So far I have presented a theory of our linguistic behavior in the puzzle
cases described.  But what does this theory have to do with philosophical
skepticism?
With some conversational implicatures we have no temptation to say or
think that an utterance with a false implicature is false.  We have no inclination to
think or say that there isn’t a gas station around the corner, or that it’s false that
there is, when a misbehaving old geezer directs us to an abandoned gas station,
falsely implicating that we could get gas there.  But consider two cases in which
we are inclined to think and say that someone spoke falsely on account of their
(true) utterance having a false implicature:
1.
Conjunctions and the implicature of a temporal ordering of theconjuncts.    You  know  Katie  didn’t  drive  drunk  last  night.Slanderous  Sammy  is  telling  everyone:  ‘Katie  got  drunk  anddrove home’.  ‘That’s a lie!’, you say, and you think it to; Katiedidn’t  get  drunk  and  drive  home!    She  drove  home  and  gotdrunk.  But in fact it’s true that Katie got drunk and drove home,just not in that order.2.
Scalar implicatures.  ‘I don’t like it, I love it’, etc.  It would beinappropriate to say ‘I like it’, so we say and think that we don’tlike it.  But in fact we do like it, we just like it so much that welove it.33 See Rysiew, op. cit., pp. 494-9834 See Conee, “Contextualism Contested,” in Steup and Sosa (eds.),Contemporary Debates inEpistemology (Blackwell, 2005), pp. 47-56, at pp. 53-4
35 I am indebted to Chris Hill for this point.
21We can confuse unassertibility with falsehood (and assertibility with truth)
– and this can result in a disposition tothink, in a given context, that a sentence
unassertible in that context is false.  That’s why I call Slanderous Sammy a liar,
even though he’s not.  He’s misbehaving, but he’s not lying.  If I’m right that this
can happen – that we cansometimes develop thethought that such-and-such is
false because it would be inapprpriate tosay it – how is this relevant for
epistemology?  I concur with Brian Weatherson when he writes:
Having  learned  that  it  would  be  improper  to  uset  to  describe  aparticular case, we can develop the intuition that this case is not anF,  whereF  is  the  property  denoted  byt.    For  example,  if  one  iscareless,  one  can  find  oneself  sharing  the  intuition  expressed  byRyle  inThe  Concept  of  Mind  that  morally  neutral  actions,  likescratching one’s head, are neither voluntary nor involuntary.  Thesource  of  this  intuition  is  the  simple  fact  that  it would  be  odd  todescribe  an  action  as  voluntary  or  involuntary  unless  there  wassome reason to do so[.]36It would be improper to use ‘knowledge’ to describe your belief that you
have hands in skeptical contexts, and as a result one may develop the intuition –
in those contexts – that your belief that you have hands does not amount to
knowledge.  But just as it’s true that Katie got drunk and drove home, and just as
it’s true that your heartbeat is involuntary, so it’s true that you know, even when
your circumstances are dire, even when the possibility of deception is salient.
So the Gricean theory of knowledge attributions defended here is relevant
for epistemology, for if it’s right, and if this is one of those cases in which we are,
in the way Weatherson describes, confusing unassertibility and falsehood, then at
least some of out skeptical intuitions are illegitimate, but understandable.  Just as
we can explain Ryle’s intuitions about the voluntary and involuntary away, so we
can explain certain skeptical intuitions away.37  This fulfills desideratum 8.  Our
theories about the nature of knowledge are apt to be influenced by intuitions
36 Weatherson, B., “What Good Are Counterexamples?,”Philosophical Studies [].
37 Note that it is obvious that this happens with conventional implicatures.  (Note this, at least, ifyou believe in them.)  Chancellor Adolph insists that he’s not a kraut; but in fact he is a kraut, itwould just be inappropriate to say it that way.  But it would be very hard to get him to think thathe is a kraut, and he certainly will reject as false any claim of the form ‘You are a kraut’, etc.
22which we should not take seriously, viz. skeptical intuitions caused by the fact
that ‘I know’ is unassertible in skeptical contexts.
As for desideratum 7, suppose I am right that we are inclined to believe
that we don’t know in skeptical contexts.  This inclination will not stop me from
being inclined – for whatever good reasons I am in general inclined towards anti-
skepticism – to believe otherwise.  Weatherson’s phenomenon is operating, but so
are my epistemically virtuous faculties; the former outputs an intuition that I don’t
know while the latter outputs an intuition that I do.  Confusion results.  A
philosopher might be perplexed by two conflicting intuitions: that on the one handof course any action of mine is either voluntary or involuntary (doesn’t voluntary
just mean ‘non voluntary’), but on the other hand certain actions appear to be
neither.  So a philosopher might be perplexed by these two: that on the one hand
of course we have knowledge, but on the other hand it one has the distinct
impression when one considers skeptical possibilities that one does not.
6. Knowledge denials
Finally, an objection that if cogent threatens the relevance of the Gricean
theory presented above.  Keith DeRose rightly admits that contextualism is not
well supported by our hesitance to say that we know in skeptical contexts.
Unassertible truths are nothing new, and very common.  But, citing Lewis,
DeRose claims that “it is not nearly as likely that an appropriately made claim
will be false.”  Unassertible truths are common, assertible falsehoods are not.
And so:
[E]xcept where we engage in special practices of misdirection, likeirony or hyperbole, we should seek to avoid asserting falsehoods,and we will thus be speaking improperly if we assert what is, fromour own point of view, false. […]  For this and some other reasons,it  greatly  helps  the  contextualist’s  case  that  we  do  (actually,  andwith seeming propriety and truth) go so far as to deny ‘knowledge’in [skeptical contexts].  The case for contextualism would be muchweakened  if  the  facts  were  instead  only  that  we  are  reluctant  toascribe  ‘knowledge’  positively  in  such  high  standards  situations,and/or  that  if  a  misguided  speaker  were  to  ascribe  ‘knowledge’
23positively  in  such  cases,  the  ascriptions  would  seem  false  and/orinappropriate.38While it is surely the case that, in the end, it is a matter not decidable from
the philosophical ‘armchair’ whether or not “we do … go so far as to deny
knowledge” in skeptical contexts, and whether or not we all do so, and whether or
not all ordinary competent speakers do so, I think DeRose is justwrong that
ordinary people always say ‘I don’t know that I have hands’ in skeptical contexts.
The far more pervasive and familiar phenomenon is their reluctance to claim
knowledge in skeptical contexts.  But since this mattercannot be settled from the
armchair, we cannot determine what the relevant data are without good (read:
repeatable, controlled) empirical research.
However, I agree with DeRose that ordinary speakers do sometimes say ‘I
don’t know that I have hands’ in skeptical contexts.  That philosophers who study
epistemology tendnot to say such things in the same contexts should give us
pause when we are considering how to interpret and explain these ordinary
utteraences.  That our hesisitation to claim knowledge in such contexts can be
explained (as above) without saying that ‘I know’ would be false in those contexts
should give us pause when we are considering adopting a theory on which ‘I
know’ is false in those contexts.  We should not be afraid of saying that ordinary
people, when they are first introduced to philosophy tend to bewrong about some
issues – psychological egoism, moral relativism and/or nihilism, content
internalism, fideism – these are all, on my views, false philosophical positions
which are almost universally shared by people who have just been introduced to
philosophy.  I mean no paternalism or elitism by claiming this, it’s just a fact –
there are some positions that are wrong, but for whatever reason are intuitive and
compelling.  I have given reasons above to think that skepticism may be intuitive
because of a confusion between unassertibility and falsehood; perhaps this
explains ordinary people’s inclination towards skepticism when they first
encounter the issue.
38 DeRose, K., “The Ordinary Language Basis for Contextualism and the New Invariantism,”Philosophical Quarterly 55 (2005), pp. 172-98, at p. 175
24This would explain people’s utterance of ‘I don’t know’ by appeal to
nothing unusual – people believe false things, and when they do they say false
things.  There may be a more elegant and charitable interpretation of people’s
utterance of ‘I don’t know’, however.  Consider:
Someone at the pencil factory has been mixing counterfeit pencilsinto the boxes of pencils that are shipped out.  I’ve got one of theseboxes,  and  I  know  that  a  significant  percentage  of  the  ‘pencils’inside  are  really  counterfeit  pencils.    But  counterfeit  pencils  canonly  be  distinguished  from  real  pencils  by  laboratory  analysis.You pick up one of the items in the box.  Me: ‘Is it a pencil?’  You:‘I don’t know.  There’s no way for me to know’.We’re  discussing  the  possibility  that  we’re  deceived  by  an  evildemon.    Can  we  rule  that  possibility  out?   How can  we  possiblyknow anything about the world around us unless we can rule thatpossibility out?  You pick up a pencil.  Me: ‘Is it a pencil?’  You:‘I don’tknow that it is.  There’s no way for me toknow’.
I think that, if you are an ordinary person, you will not put any stress on
‘know’ in the first story, but will stress ‘know’ both times you say it in the second
story.  Ordinary knowledge denials are not stressed; skeptical knowledge denials
are.  Why?  Here’s a possible explanation.  Pace DeRose, our skeptical knowledge
denials are hyperbolic, or strictly speaking, meiotic – they understate our
epistemic situation.
This is an anti-skeptical variation on a proposal recently defended by
Jonathan Schaffer.39  On his view, ordinary knowledge claims are cases of
hyperbole – literally false, but assertable.  The proposal I’m suggesting here says
the opposite; skeptical knowledge denials are cases of meiosis that flout the
maxim of Quality.  Compare:
Descartes: ‘I don’tknow that this is a pencil!  That it seems to methat  this  is  a  pencil,  on  the  other  hand,  that  is  something  that  Iknow.’Detroiter:  ‘Joey  Harrington  isn’t  aquarterback!    Tom  Brady,  onthe other hand, he is aquarterback.’
39 Schaffer, J., “Skepticism, Contextualism, and Discrimination,” cited above.
25
We should treat these utterances as analogous.  Harrington is a
quarterback, just not a good one.  Descartes belief that he is holding a pencil is a
case of knowledge, but not a case of certain knowledge, or a case of knowledge
supplemented by proof, or a case of knowledge plus the ruling out of salient
alternatives.  So ‘knowledge denials’ are false, but assertible in some contexts.
As in the case of the Detroiter’s denial that Harrington is a quarterback, an
intelligent listener will know what is being suggested – he lacks contextually
salient things that are desirable in a quarterback.  And so it is with ‘knowledge
denials’ – we deny knowledge to suggest that our ordinary beliefs lack certain
contextually salient things that are desirable in a belief.
Note a stark difference between the two pencil cases.  In the first case, if
you are normal, you do notbelieve that the object you are holding is a pencil.
Since you don’t know whether it is or not, and since you are aware of your
ignorance, you rightly refrain from believing one way or the other.  But in the
second case you continue to believe that the object is a pencil.  You might say ‘I
think it’s a pencil, but I don’tknow that it is’.  This is why your denial in the
second case is ‘I don’tknow that it is’ and not simply ‘I don’t know’.  Because if
you were to say ‘I don’t know’, this would suggest that you did not believe one
way or the other, as in the first case.  But in the second case, you do believe one
way or another.  This is further evidence that your utterance is not literally true,
and that you (at some level) are aware of that.  For if you really thought that you
didn’t know whether the object was a pencil, you would stop believing that it is.
And then it would be natural for you to say ‘I don’t know’ in the same tone (i.e.
without stress) and without the additional ‘that it is’, as you say in the first case.
But of course the only plausible story we can tell about an ordinary speaker in a
skeptical context is one in which she says ‘I don’t know that it is’, because the
only plausible story we can tell about an ordinary speaker is one on which she
continues to believe that the object is a pencil despite her utterance of ‘I don’t
know that it is’.  And this suggests that her utterance is not to be taken literally.
I think there is something right in both proposals that I have
sympathetically considered – the proposal that often ‘I don’t know’ is simply said
26because of a false skeptical belief, and the proposal that sometimes ‘I don’t know’
might be said by one flouting Quality.  The upshot, though, is that neither of these
proposals gives us reason to give up the anti-skeptical invariantism defended here.
7. Conclusion
So what is the relationship between knowledge and ‘knowledge’?  It is
unexceptional; it is the relationship between anything and its context-insensitive
name.  Can the nature of our uses of ‘knows’ shed light on the nature of
knowledge?  On the natural reading of that question, the answer is No, but on a
more liberal reading it is Yes – our uses of ‘knows’ are part of our conversational
practices generally, and facts about what can and cannot be said may influence
our intuitions about what is and is not the case.  But it would be a mistake to think
that this has been the study of knowledge on the basis of the study of
‘knowledge’, in particular – rather I have proposed that some intuitions about
knowledge are suspect, on the basis of some facts about conversation, in
general.40
40 Thanks to Jonathan Schaffer, Jason Stanley, Matt Weiner, and Ernest Sosa for valuablecomments on drafts of this material.  I wrote this at Via de Cerchi 7 in Florence, at 41 Fremont inFox Point, and at Texas Tech University in Lubbock.  Versions were presented at a workshop onthe semantics/pragmatics distinction at the CONTEXT 05 conference in Paris during the summerof 2005 and at the APA’s Pacific Division Meeting in Portland during the spring of 2006.
27
