Conceptual conservatism and contingent
composition
Josh Parsons
November 11, 20051 Introduction
“Under what circumstances do things add up to or compose something?” This is
what Peter van Inwagen (1990, p. 31) calls the Special Composition Question.
Everyone, it seems, has a different answer. Van Inwagen’s, famously, is “when
the activities of those things constitute a life”. Other people — nihilists about
composition — say “never!” Other people — universalists about composition —
say “always!”. Yet other people — brutalists about composition — say that there
is no answer.
I want to propose a new answer. But it is not a very new one. In some respects
I agree with what the brutalists have said about composition. In other respects I
agree with the universalists. The main novel feature of my answer is the insight I
think it gives into what the debate over the Special Composition Question is about.
The respect in which I agree with the brutalists is this: van Inwagen, and those
who take his question seriously, add the following constraint on what can count
as a good answer: the answer must consist of a necessary, apriori truth of the
form “there is something that theXes compose iff ...” where the “...” contains no
mereological vocabulary. But, says the brutalist, how can there be such a apriori
truth, given that are no apriori truths of the form “xis part ofyiff ...” (where,
again, “...” contains no mereological vocabulary). I feel a lot of sympathy with
this position. The respect in which I agree with the universalists is this: I think
that their answer is right, and for more-or-less the reasons they give. But these
reasons do not elevate their answer to the status of apriori or necessary truth.
1What I am mainly going to do here is to argue that the universalist’s answer
is not aconceptualtruth. It is not related to the concept of part-whole, or to the
concept of composition, in the same way that “All bachelors are unmarried” is
related to the concept of a bachelor. That argument will take place in sections 4 of
this paper. It has an important premise that I expect to be controversial about what
kinds of conceptual truths there can be, which I callconceptual conservatism.
However, I also want to draw an analogy between realism about composite objects
and realism about the external world. I so this in sections 2 and 3. The analogy, if
cogent, suggests that universalism is a contingent, empirical, truth. Though thaty
will also no doubt be controversial, I think it is a seductive view if you buy into a
certain kind of metaphysical realism and naturalism.2 Realism about the external worldI’ll start by putting forward a kind of dialectical scenario involving realism about
the external world, viewed from a very realist perspective. Nothing I’ll say here
will be news, or even very convincing to anti-realists. The purpose rather, is to
draw an analogy with a corresponding dialectic involving realism about composite
objects.
Suppose I’m confronted by asimple nihilist about the external world. The
simple nihilist says “The external world is an illusion. There are no extra-mental
objects, only ideas and sense-impressions. You are just mistaken to think that
there are chairs, tables, human bodies, or electrons.” I would reply in this way:
“No, there are extra-mental objects, and I have good reason to believe in them,
because they form part of the best explanation of my experiences.” That answers
the simple nihilist, because he thinks that my explanation of table-appearances is
just false and mistaken, and has no better explanation to offer in its place.
Now suppose I’m confronted by asophisticated nihilist about the externalworld. This character might remind us of Berkeley, Mill, Schlick or the early Car-
nap. She says: “There’s no question of whether the external world exists. Talking
of the external worldjust isanother way of talking about ideas or experiences
— talk of tablesjust istalk of the permanent possibility of table-appearances.”
The sophisticated nihilist produces a complicated semantical theory of table-talk
couched in phenomenalistic terms. My reply to the simple nihilist can’t work
here, because the sophisticated nihilist will agree with my explanation of table-
appearances, but deny that it is incompatible with her nihilistic doctrines.
2I must reply to the sophisticated nihilist in a different way: “The view that talk-
ing of tablesjust isanother way of talking about table-ideas or table-appearances
is bad semantics. Semantic theories are good insofar as they explain and predict
the behavior of language users. Your semantic theory does a very bad job of this,
as it predicts that no two people who understands their own words would dis-
agree over the existence of the external world. This, however, is manifestly not
the case.” What I think is wrong-headed about sophisticated nihilism is its anti-
naturalism — it gives a theory of the meanings of people’s words not to explain
their actual behaviour, but to prescribe the behaviour the nihilist would like. I ﬁnd
this particularly annoying coming from empricists.
Throughout this paper I am speaking as a realist about the external world
speaks to other realists about the external world, and as a realist about composite
objects speaks to other realists about those. A really sophisticated nihilist might
not like being called a nihilist. Afterall, her view is that all the realist says about
chairs and tables is true. So, for example, at the end of the thirdDialogue, Berke-
ley describes his views as those of “common sense”, and the “opposite” of “philo-
sophical scepticism”. InPositivism and RealismSchlick insists that his positivism
is not a “renewal of idealism”. “Logical positivism and realism are... not opposed;
anyone who acknowledges our principle must actually be an empirical realist”.
That’s how some sophisticated nihilists like to describe their own views, and
such a description would be appropriate if they were right about what “realism”,
“external world” and “table” mean. However, we are all realists here (or so I will
assume) so I will continue to speak as though sophisticated nihilism is mistaken
about what those terms mean. Given what I mean by “realism”, “external world”
and “table”, it would be inaccurate of me to report that Schlick is a realist, that or
that Berkeley believed that there were trees and tables.1
(There are varying degrees of sophistication among nihilists. Some might in-
sist that they are not nihilists — that nihilism is false as a matter of conceptual
truth; less sophisticated nihlists might say that nihilism and realism go with dif-
ferent, equally good, conceptual schemes; still less sophisticated ones that there
is a privileged conceptual scheme in which we can state the empirical truth of
nihilism, though perhap one that is only used in metaphysics classrooms).
The realist about the external world, and the simple and sophisticated nihilists
make up an interesting trio. Consider their respective attitudes to the following
principle:
3Table-Appearance Principle (TAP).There is a table iff there are suit-
ably robust table-appearances.
This principle should be imagined to be capable of more detailed formulation.
Think of “suitably robust table-appearances” as a kind of schematic stand-in for
a speciﬁcation of just what would count as suitably robust, and what would count
as a table-appearance. And imagine that this speciﬁcation does not mention the
word “table”, or any cognate of it. The sophisticated nihilist will help us out here,
as they need such a speciﬁcation in order to ﬁll in the details of their semantic
analysis of table-talk.
The simple nihilist might say something like this about TAP: “TAP iscon-tingentandfalse. That it is contingent is shown by the possibility of sceptical
scenarios in which I am only dreaming that there are tables, or which I am a brain
in a vat or plaything of an evil demon who is deceiving me into thinking that there
are tables. Since those skeptical scenarios cannot be falsiﬁed empirically, we have
a free choice as to whether to believe it or not. If, like me, you have a taste for
desert landscapes and small ontologies, you’ll say that it’s false”.
The realist and the sophisticated nihilist each have their own ways of saying
what is wrong with the simple nihilist’s argument. According to the sophisticated
nihilist, it’s a mistake to suppose that TAP is contingent — once we see what the
“empirical meaning” of table-talk is, we’ll see that sceptical scenarios ask us to
imagine the impossible. In fact, the sophisticated nihilist will hold that TAP is an
analytic truth — a consequence of the meaning of “table”.
According to the realist (or at least, to the kind of realist I am), it’s a mistake
to think that if TAP cannot be conclusively veriﬁed (which would require that
that the sceptical scenarios be falsiﬁed) then there is no reason to believe it. The
reasons are, as I suggested earlier, abductive — TAP is a consequence of the best
explanations available of what happens when I go to interact with what appears
for all the world to be a table. The realist should agree with the simple nihilist that
TAP is contingent — to say otherwise we would have to refute the sceptic! Indeed,
my argument against the sophisticated nihilist is precisely that their semantical
theory can’t make sense of sceptical scenarios.
An important feature of the realist position I wish to hold is a distinction be-
tween what I will call strong and weak underdetermination of theory by data. Two
theories areweaklyunderdetermined by data iff no experiment could verify or fal-
sify one without also verifying or falsifying (respectively) the other. Two theories
4arestronglyunderdetermined by data if they are weakly underdetermined,andin
addition, no considerations of theoretical virtue, quality as an explanation, or re-
spect for the canons of non-demonstrative inference, could decide between them.
Typically, the central doctrines of modern science are weakly, but not strongly,
underdetermined relative to their rejected rivals.
I think that TAP is like those. It should be thought of as having the same status
as the thesis that we inhabit a spacetime of variable curvature (as opposed to a
spacetime of constant curvature in complicated forces act on objects to produce
the appearances of variable curvature) or that the Earth was created some billions
of years ago (as opposed to in 4004 BC, complete with fossils to deceive the
faithless).3 Realism about composite objects
For me, at least, realism about composite objects is a lot like realism about the
external world. Chairs, tables, molecules, and protons form part of the best ex-
planation of my experiences. When I thump a table, the noise produced and the
feeling of resistance I feel are best explained by positing a middle-sized physical
object that my ﬁst has encountered.
Just as there are simple nihilists about the external world, so there are simple
nihilists about composite objects. They claim that there are no composite objects;
no chairs, no tables, no molecules, no protons. There are quarks and leptons, at
least if current physical science is correct in regarding those things as mereolog-
ically simple. According to the simple nihilist, when ordinary people say ‘there
is a table’ or scientists say ‘there is a proton’, they are speaking falsely, making a
philosophical mistake.
Just as there are sophisticated nihilists about the external world, so there are
sophisticated nihilists about composite objects. They claim that, at least when
non-philosophers are speaking, talk about composite objectsjust istalk about
simple objects. For example, talk about protons just is talk about quarks; talk
about tables just is talk about the simple constituents of tables. Sophisticated ni-
hilists can produce semantic theories of table talk which quantify only over simple
objects (though perhaps in irreducibly plural ways).
(Nihilists about composite objects tend rather more towards the simple end of
the spectrum than nihilists about the external world. I think that is this due to
5institutional factors — that people who consider the question of nihilism about
composite objects tend to be philosophers who work in metaphysics, and are as
a result less likely to take a deﬂationary attitude towards their own subdiscipline.
Cian Dorr, is, I think, a straightforward simple nihilist; modulo the fact that he
believes in persons, Trenton Merricks is a simple nihilist; modulo the fact that
he believes in living things, Peter van Inwagen is a sophisticated nihilist of the
kind who admits a privileged context in which the truth of simple nihilism can be
stated; Eli Hirsch and other neo-Carnapians are of course thoroughly sophisticated
nihilists).
Just as, in the case of the external world, we have principles like TAP, in the
case of composite objects we have principles like the Table Constituent Principle:Table-Constituent Principle (TCP).There is a table iff there are suit-
ably arranged table-constituents.
As before, I ask you to imagine that “suitably arranged table-constituents” is a
schematic stand-in for a phrase that does not use the word “table” or any cognate
of it.
Simple nihilists of course think that TCP be false. According to them there are
suitably arranged table-constituents, but there are no tables. Sophisticated nihilists
think that TCP is a kind of conceptual truth (at least when non-philosophers say
it). A realist who thinks the way I do will say that it is a contingent, empirical
truth, of the same status as TAP and the scientiﬁc theories mentioned earlier.
Metaphysicians interested in the part-whole relationship are more used to talk-
ing about principles more general than TCP, such as this one:General Sum Principle (GSP).There is a mereological sum of the Xes
iff there are the Xes.
GSP is a lot like a highly generalised version of TCP. Tables are a particular
kind of mereological sum, and table constituents are a particular kind of thing. So
GSP is like TCP with all of the content speciﬁc to tables stripped out. Clearly a
simple nihilist will deny GSP. Realists and sophisticated nihilists might or might
not afﬁrm it — but a realist of the kind I like will say that, like TCP, GSP is con-
tingent and empirical if true; a sophisticated nihilist will say that GSP is necessary
and conceptual if true.
6As a matter of raw sociological data, this is a very unusual view. Many meta-
physicians believe GSP, but few think that it is contingent, none that I am aware of
besides me think that it is empirical (even in the very extended sense of “empiri-
cal” that I mean here). I ﬁnd it hard to see how it could fail to be empirical, without
some form of sophisticated nihilism being true. How could the mereological con-
cepts alone ensure that GSP is true, unless there is some devious reinterpretation
of “there is a mereological sum” involved that shows how it can be true even if
all there is are atoms and the void? The following section develops this argument
against realists about composite objects who think that GSP is a conceptual truth.
In the remainder of this section, I explain why I think that GSP is true.
Let’s start by returning to the views of the nihilists about composite objects.
I reject simple nihilism because, it seems to me, composite objects play a cru-
cial role in the best explanations of my experience. Folk scientiﬁc explanations
cite thrown rocks as part of the explanation of broken windows; biological expla-
nations are far gone in talk of organisms, to say nothing of lineages and clades;
astronomical explanations speak of galaxies, stars, and solar systems.
Those who have read Merricks (2001) will not be impressed by this argument.
For it seems that the explanations I’m citing are redundant — couldn’t we just
as well explain what happens to a window shattered by the impact of a rock by
appeal to the particles of which the rock is composed?
Perhaps. But I’d like to see the explanation given in purely subatomic terms —
and I’m quite sure that none will be forthcoming. A bunch of quarks and leptons
(even the very ones of which the rock is composed) might as easily pass straight
through a window as break it. What someone like Merricks has in mind, of course,
is that if the particles arrive at the window arranged as they in fact are — arranged
rock-wise, we might say — then they would break the window. But to turn this
into a real explanation of the window’s breaking, we need to turn “arranged rock-
wise” into a real microphysical description. Even if we could do that, we might
not get any useful prediction or explanation out of physical theory, for the system
of the rock and window would be turned into an intractable many-body problem.
It’s a striking fact that scientiﬁc — and proto-scientiﬁc “rocks and windows”
— explanations citing the existence of macroscopic objects work pretty well. This
surely is reason to believe that there are macroscopic objects. There are also
some striking reductionistic explanations of the behavior of macroscopic objects
in terms of their microscopic parts, and these give us reason to believe that macro-
scopic objects are indeed composed of those sorts of parts. These explanations are
7compatible— otherwise we would have established some kind of emergentism —
but that does not mean that either style of explanation is redundant. For reduction-
istic explanations to render macroscopic ones redundant, they would have to be
better explanations in every case. But they are not — in most cases they are more
complex, even to the point of being intractable.
Given that there are composite objects, are there as many as GSP would have
us say? There is a good reason to be a realist about composite objects — is there
good reason to be a universalist? I think there is. For there is no limit to what
kinds of things compose other things that is both adequate and acceptable. To be
adequate, a limit on composition must not rule out any objects that are cited in
scientiﬁc explanation; to be acceptable, it must not be unacceptably anthropocen-
tric. For example, the thesis that there are all and only the composite objects cited
in actual scientiﬁc explanation is the adequate composition thesispar excellence,
but it is hopelessly anthropocentric. What a grand stroke of luck that the universe
provides us with just those objects that we actually cite in our explanations. If
there was some non-anthropocentrically speciﬁable feature that the composite ob-
jects cited in our explanations had — if, for example, the only objects that ever
played any role in our explanations were perfectly continuous — that would be a
reason for thinking that those were all the composite objects. But there is no such
feature that I know of.4 Conceptual conservatism
I now want to return to the question of whether principles like GSP, TCP, and
TAP can be regarded as conceptual truths. I think that they should not be — I
ﬁnd the idea that there could be a conceptual truth about what there is reminiscent
of ontological argument for the existence of God. Like the ontological argument,
however, it is hard to say exactly what would be wrong with this. In this section
I try to do so. I argue, largely by example, that well-behaved concepts should be
“conservative” in a sense I’ll describe; I’ll then show that a concept of part-whole
of which GSP was a conceptual truth would fail this test.
A conceptCisconceptually conservativerelative to a set of back-
ground conceptsBiff there is no consequence of the conceptual truths
ofCandBtogether that is (a) expressible using the conceptual re-
8sources ofBalone, and (b) is not a consequence of the conceptual
truths ofBalone.
The idea of a conceptually conservative concept is related to the logical notion
of conservative extension. A formal systemSis said to be a conservative exten-
sion ofSiffShas no theorems expressed in the vocabulary ofSthat are not also
theorems ofS. So I could say thatCisconceptually conservativerelative toB
iff the system of conceptual truths ofCplusBis a conservative extension of the
system of conceptual truths ofB.
I am going to argue for what I will call conceptual conservatism — that con-
cepts that are not conceptually conservative relative to a background of other con-
cepts we could acquire and use independently areill-behaved, and thus not con-
cepts we would wish to have. Usually the background I have in mind is that of
pure logic with quantiﬁcation and identity. Some might go further, and say that
there are not really any such concepts. I would be happy with that conclusion too.
Then I will show that, if a principle like GSP is a conceptual truth of the concept
of part-whole, then either some form of nihilism is true, or the concept of part-
whole is not conceptually conservative. That gives me an argument for the form
of realism that I prefer: the realism that holds that GSP and TCP are, if true, not
conceptually so.
The attraction of conceptual conservatism is best illustrated by a rogue’s gallery
of non-conservative concepts:
•Boche.(Dummett) According to Dummett, it is a conceptual truth of the
concept “Boche” both that “all Germans are Boche” and that “all Boche
are cruel”. Anyone who deploys “boche” has to be prepared to accept “all
Germans are cruel”.
•Descartes’ God.In the ﬁfthMeditation, Descartes makes a striking psy-
chological claim about himself: “I can’t think of God without existence,
just as I can’t think of a mountain without a valley”. As I read Descartes, he
is claiming that his thought “God exists” is a conceptual truth of his concept
“God”. He also thinks, presumably, that “God is omnipotent, omniscient,
and omnibenevolent” are conceptual truths of “God”.
•The Remartian.(Mackie) Parodying Descartes, J.L. Mackie suggests that
“Remartian” be understood so that “Remartians exists” and “Remartians are
9intelligent inhabitants of the planet Mars” are conceptual truths of “Remar-
tian”.
•Tonk.(Prior) All instances of the schemas If α, then α tonk β , and If α
tonk β then β are conceptual truths of “tonk”.
Here is a way of saying what is bad about these concepts: someone who has
all it takes to consider the hypothesis “All Germans are cruel” — who lacks noth-
ing in their understanding of what a German is and what cruelty is — but lacks
the concept “Boche”, knows that if you want to know whether all the Germans
are cruel, you have to look at what they have been getting up to. The user of
“Boche” must disagree — for him “All Germans are cruel” is a conceptual truth.
But, what according to the Boche-user, is lacking in the non-Boche-user’s under-
standing of her own concepts that prevents her recognising this conceptual truth?
How can anything be lacking — by hypothesis, our non-Boche-user lacks nothing
in their understanding of what a German is and what cruelty is. It seems that the
Boche-user must say that somehow you can fully understand the concepts “Ger-
man” and “cruel”, but yet not know that “All Germans are cruel” is a conceptual
truth. Similarly, Descartes must say that someone who has all it takes to con-
sider the hypothesis “An omnipotent being exists” — who lacks nothing in their
understanding of omnipotence or of existence — could fail to recognise that this
hypothesis is a conceptual truth.
This is because both “Boche” and Descartes’ “God” are non-conservative con-
cepts. “All Germans are cruel” is expressible given conceptual resources not in-
cluding “Boche”, and is not a consequence of any conceptual truths about those
resources. “An omnipotent being exists” is likewise expressible given conceptual
resources not including “God”, and is not a consequence of any conceptual truths
about those resources.
A nice consequence of this is that even someone in the grip of an ill-behaved
concept ought to be in principle able to recognise its ill-behavior — even an En-
glish jingoist should be able to see, on sober reﬂection, that there’s something
suspicious about the concept “Boche”, and even a Cartesian theist can agree that
there’s something suspicious about the Deﬁnitional Ontological Argument. Non-
conservative concepts would straitjacket us into closing off possibilities that we
could otherwise have left open, and if you ﬁnd yourself in such a straitjacket,
the best thing to do is to try to escape. Ask yourself: am I in the grip of a non-
conservative concept? Do I recognise as conceptual truths principles the concept
of which they are conceptual truths is not needed to express the truth in question?
10If you believe that all the theorems of classical mereology, including GSP, are
conceptual truths of the relation concept “is part of”, you are in the grip of a non-
conservative concept. For you will regard “For anyxandy, ifxis not identical
toy, then there is something not identical to either ofxory” as a consequence
of a conceptual truth. But it is not a consequence of quantiﬁcational logic with
identity, which is all that’s needed to express it.2
A couple of disclaimers before I proceed further: First, conceptual conser-
vatism isnotthe view that all thetruthsof mereology (or of any other theory)
must be a conservative extension of the truths of pure logic. We might call this
viewalethic conservativismIt’s very hard for a theory to be conservative in that
sense — certainly scientiﬁc theories are not. The claim is only that theconcep-tual truthsof mereology should be a conservative extension of pure logic. This
is a standard that scientiﬁc (and even mathematical) theories can meet.3 Second,
the issues I’m bringing up here are particularly relevant to people who think that
grasping conceptual truths, or grasping conceptually valid inferences is constitu-
tive of grasping a concept. But I’m not endorsing that view of concepts. I’m
simply putting forward conceptual conservativism as a constraint on any theory
of conceptual truths.
There is an important kind of escape from the style of argument that I used
in the previous section. For example, intuitionistic logicians will lose no time in
telling you that classical negation is non-conservative relative to the background of
the other truth-functional logical operators. For logical principles such as Pierce’s
law, (((p→q) →p) →p), are expressible using only the background (in this
case, only implication) but can only be proved in a classical proof system by a
detour through formulas containing negation.
The intuitionist is quite right that classical negation is non-conservative rel-
ative to the background of the other operators. But they need to look again at
the deﬁnition of conceptual conservatism I gave above. For classical negation
to be ill-behaved must be non-conservative relative to a conceptual background
we could acquire and use independently. The classical logician should say —
as indeed they often do — that all the truth-functional connectives are a package
deal: none of them can be understood without understanding the conceptual con-
nections to the others. If you’ve managed to acquire the concept of implication
without that of negation, then you haven’t quite understood implication yet (or the
implication you’ve understood is not classical implication).
11Suppose you wanted to defend the idea that GSP is a conceptual truth of the
concept of part-whole by saying that part-whole is a package deal with some
concept represented in GSP and its problematic non-conservative consequences.
What could that concept be?
Recall that the non-conservative consequence of classical mereology was this:
“For anyxandy, ifxis not identical toy, then there is something not identical
to either ofxory”. There are two likely candidates in that sentence: identity,
and the quantiﬁers. Someone who wanted to hold onto the view that GSP is a
conceptual truth could do so by claiming that you can’t fully understand identity
without without grasping its conceptual connections to the concept of part-whole.
Or they could do so by claiming that the quantifers can’t be understood without
grasping their conceptual connection with the mereological concepts.
Both of these claims might sound outlandish on a ﬁrst pass, but I think that
there are people who would endorse them.
In the case of identity, some people, notably Donald Baxter and David Arm-
strong, hold that in some non-trivial sense, composition is identity.4 They will pre-
sumably say that you can’tfullyunderstand the concept of identity until you grasp
it in its full generality — many-one identity (Baxter) or partial identity (Arm-
strong). Both of those are supposed to be mereological concepts, which might
have GSP as an associated conceptual truth. So according to the composition as
identity theorists, you haven’t fully understood identity until you ﬁnd “For anyx
andy, ifxis not identical toy, then there is something not identical to either ofx
ory” to be a conceptual truth.
In the case of the quantiﬁers, some people hold that the quantiﬁer used in as-
serting GSP is a kind of plural ﬁrst order (PFO) quantiﬁer. Though we pronounce
it “there is a”, it really means “there are some”. Moreover, they’ll also hold that
the part-whole relation is a special logical predicate pronounced “is part of” but
really meaning “are some of the”. This predicate is part of the machinery of PFO
quantiﬁcation, and cannot be seperated from it. Furthermore, GSP (and the other
theorems of classical mereology) when translated in this way come out to be tau-
tologies of PFO quantiﬁcation. These people are sophisticated nihilists. Their
theory that mereological talk is really PFO talk is one way of formulating the type
of nihilist semantics that I discussed in section 3.
Both of those views escape the charge of non-conservatism. But both are
radical and unpopular positions — not what is wanted by the typical realist about
composite objects. If you want to be a realist about composite objects, don’t
12want to be the grip of a non-conservative concept, and don’t want to believe that
composition is identity, then the only option left is to agree with me that GSP is
not a conceptual truth.5 Conclusion
I’ll ﬁnish with two disclaimers.
First, I hope that I’ve managed to at least communicate the sense of unease
I feel at the widespread view among realists that GSP is necessary, and if not a
conceptual truth, then a truth capable of justiﬁcation on an entirely apriori basis.
Communicating that sense of unease was the burden of my analogy between the
two forms of nihilism.
I’m pretty conﬁdent that conceptually true bridges between the microscopic
and macroscopic worlds sit ill with view that both are equally real. I would like
however, to be able to say something about why this is. What is it about conceptu-
ally true principles like GSP that gives them the sulphurous reek of anti-realism?
I’ve conjectured that it has to with a failure of conceptual conservatism. I think
it’s striking that this predicts that people who want GSP to be conceptual would
be attracted to Baxter’s “composition is identity” thesis, if not to sophisticated
nihlism. But I’m not nearly so conﬁdent that this is the right diagnosis, as I am
that some diagnosis is needed.
Second, I’ve played very fast and loose with the distinction among distinc-
tions between conceptual vs. empirical truths on the one hand, and necessary vs.
contingent truths on the other. Even if I’m right that GSP (and TCP and TAP) are
empirical truths, does it follow that they are contingent? Really the more popular
view among realists about composite objects is that GSP expresses a necessary,
but not conceptual truth. If I had to argue against that, I would do by showing that
it ﬁts none of the usual Kripkean models for the necessary a posteriori (it does
not follow from a true identity statement concerning rigid names). I claimed that
GSP is a kind of generalisation of TCP; and TCP seems to have the character of
a bridge law. Perhaps the next step forward for this project is to see what views
about bridge laws would ﬁt best with it.
13Notes
1On this point, I am in agreement with Lewis (1990). Other aspects of my defence of realism,
especially in the idea of the justiﬁcation of realism as a best explanation owe a debt to the work of
J.J.C. Smart and of Michael Devitt.
2 Here is a proof of the non-conservative consequence of classical mereology:
Suppose there’sxandyandx=y.Perhapsxis a proper part ofy. Then there is a proper part ofydisjoint fromx, call itz.z=x
(because they are disjoint) andz=y(becausezis a proper part ofy). Here I am appealing to what
Peter Simons (1987) calls the Weak Supplementation Principle — an uncontroversial theorem of
classical mereology. Perhapsyis a proper part ofx. In that case, there is a proper part ofxdistinct
from both, for the same reasons.
Perhaps neither of of them is a proper part of the other. Then there must be a part ofxdisjoint
fromy, call itx(thoughxmight bexitself) and a part ofydisjoint fromx, call ity(thoughy
might beyitself. The sum,z, ofxandyhas to have bothxandyas parts, but sincexis disjoint
fromy,z=x, and sinceyis disjoint fromx,z=y. This reasoning appeals to GSP.
Since this dilemma is exhaustive, and on every horn we ﬁnd that there is aznot identical to
eitherxory, we can conclude that ifxis not identical toy, then there is something not identical to
either ofxandy.
3There is a certain kind of philosophy of mathematics that makes it hard for mathematical
theories to meet the standards of conceptual conservatism. If you thought, for example, that the
truths of mathematics — or even just of some part of mathematics, perhaps arithmetic — were
analytic, then, since arithmetic is not a conservative extension of pure logic, you would have to
say that some mathematical concepts are not conceptually conservative.
4Here is a novel argument against the composition-as-identity thesis. The thesis claims at least
that “strict” identity — identity in the traditional sense —- is a special case of a more general
relation, where this more general relation is mereological in character. So, for example, Baxter
might say that general identity is summation — the many-one relation between a plurality of sum-
mands and their sum — and strict identity is the special case where we have only one summand.
Armstrong might that say that general identity is overlap — the relation between objects that share
a part — and strict identity is the special case where objects sharealltheir parts.
If this were right, then we ought to be able to use what Armstrong or Baxter say about strict
identity to deﬁne it in purely mereological terms — terms that do not appeal any any prior notion
of identity — and we should expect that the logical features of identity would be exhausted by
what can be derived from this deﬁnition. If that did not work, then surely strict identity would
more than just a mere special case of general identity.
So we should expect that the substitution of identicals should be a derivable rule in a formal
mereology that does not assume identity, and does not include the substitution rule as one of its
primitive rules. But this doesn’t work. You can formulate classical mereology with identity as a
deﬁned relation, and even do it in such a way that the substitutivity of identicals is an eliminable
14rule, but you won’t be able to derive substitutivity from a mereological basis alone. To illustrate
this, no amount of pure mereology without identity is going to entail “ifxandyshare all their
parts, thenxis red iffyis red”.University of California, DavisReferences
Lewis, D. (1990). Noneism or allism. InPapers in Metaphysics and Epistemol-ogy, pp. 152–163. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Merricks, T. (2001).Objects and Persons. Oxford University Press.Simons, P. (1987).Parts: a Study in Ontology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.van Inwagen, P. (1990).Material Beings. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
15
