Research

My primary areas of research are in epistemology, and in the philosophy of language, particularly, issues concerning linguistic meaning and cognition. The list of drafts and works in progress below gives you an idea into the kinds of issues that interest me. (Update Feb 9th, 2010: Many papers have been removed for revision or publication. New links will appear soon.

Calibrated Probabilities and the Epistemology of DisagreementDRAFT


  
 This paper uses two different measures of reliability for probabilistic belief-revision rules, Calibration and Brier Scoring, to assess the comparative reliability of two belief-revision rules relevant to the epistemology of disagreement, the Equal Weight and Stay the Course rules. On the Calibration measure of reliability, epistemic peerhood is easy to come by, and employing
the Equal Weight rule in the case of peer disagreement generally renders you less reliable than
Staying the Course. On the Brier-Score measure of reliability, epistemic peerhood is much
more difficult to come by, but employing the Equal Weight rule in the case of peer disagreement
always renders you more reliable than Staying the Course. I conclude with some lessons we can draw from these formal results for the normative issues rational belief-change in the face of peer disagreement, foreshadowing part II of my work on this topic, ``On the Rationality of Belief-Invariance in Light of Peer Disagreement." 


 
&nbsp;

The Rationality of Belief-Invariance in Light of Peer DisagreementDRAFT


  
 This is part II of the work on the epistemological significance of disagreement and a continuation of the paper posted above, "Calibrated Probabilities and the Epistemology of Disagreement".  This paper draws two anti-skeptical lessons from the formal results of the first paper,  namely, that it is not the case that you are always rationally obliged to change your mind in the face of disagreement, and that when you are so-obliged, the result is that you increase your knowledge. In the process, I respond to the Elga objection to Stay the Course views in the epistemology of disagreement by showing how, on any measure of reliability and epistemic peerhood, the inference from disagreement to epistemic inferiority or superiority is invalid. 


 
&nbsp;

 Are Cantonese Speakers Really Descriptivists? Revisiting Cross-cultural SemanticsDRAFT


  
 This is a response to Machery, Mallon, Nichols, and Stich's 2004 "Semantics, Cross-cultural Style" in which I provide data that native Cantonese-speakers are not descriptivists about the referents of proper names. 

 
&nbsp;

 A New Argument Against the Instrumental Conception of Epistemic RationalityDRAFT


  
 I provide a novel argument
against the Instrumental Conception of Epistemic Rationality on the basis of an unnoticed
phenomenon I call "rational preemption." You can now revise
your plans and actions rationally in order to preempt or prevent
foreseeable future irrationality. However, you cannot now revise
your beliefs rationally in order to preempt or prevent foreseeable
future irrationality. The ability to be preemptively practically
rational in your actions and plans, but not preemptively epistemically rational in your beliefs, implies that epistemic rationality
is not a species of practical rationality.
 
&nbsp;

 A Commitment Tracking Theory of Rational InferenceDRAFT


  
 According to my 
Commitment-tracking theory of the rationality of inference, an inference is 
rational only if it is properly evidence-tracking. What counts as evidence 
for a subject is a matter of a subject's commitments. This commitment- 
tracking theory of evidence states that, for a subject S, what counts as evidence for what depends both on the structure and content of S's knowledge, 
beliefs, and credences, and on a set of objective, subject-independent normative principles that generate from that noetic structure a new structure, 
the class of beliefs and credences to which S is committed. This latter class 
of commitments is what S's inferences must track in order to be rational. 

The Commitment-Tracking theory makes sense of the way in which evidence 
seems to be both subjective and objective, and it blocks a certain kind of 
skepticism regarding the rationality of inferences. 


 
&nbsp;

The Dynamic Foundations of Epistemic Rationality
PhD Thesis, Princeton University. January 2007

  
 Abstract: Classical theories of epistemic rationality take an agent’s individual beliefs
to be the only things that are rational or irrational. For them, rationality
is wholly static. Recent work in epistemology take sets of individual beliefs
and also changes of belief over time to be rational or irrational. For these
theories, rationality is both static and dynamic. However, for both groups,
static rationality is fundamental. In my dissertation, I argue to the contrary
that, in fact, all rationality is dynamic rationality. Epistemic reasons, rationality,
and justification as applying only to changes of belief. This wholly
dynamic view of rationality, which I call "Dynamicism" has wide-ranging
epistemological consequences. A small set of simple, elegant, and independently
motivated principles of dynamic rationality can illuminate and solve
otherwise interminable epistemological disputes.

 
&nbsp;

Works in Progress

Relative Truth and Its Commitments: The Problem of Individuation

  
 Recent work in truth-relativity attempts to make good on two
promises: (1) to make literal sense of the claim that one and the same
proposition can be true in one context but false in another, and
(2) to argue that some sentences in natural language express
such relatively-true propositions. According to John MacFarlane, the
most prominent and developed advocate of relative-truth, the way
in which we make sense of relative-truth is to embed it into a
general theory of meaning and assertion, where relative-truth can
be understood in terms of a kind of commitment one makes in
asserting a sentence. For MacFarlane, we recover the sense
in which a proposition can be relatively true by looking at the
norms involved in defending one's assertion of a sentence expressing that proposition. This
paper explores the extent to which we can individuate meanings
from the commitments of assertion, and concludes that we can make
sense of relative-truth in terms of commitments of assertion only
at the cost of making it implausible that natural language
sentences express relatively-true propositions.


 
&nbsp;

In Defense of Universal Grammar

  
 This is a response to recent critics, both theoretical and empirical, of the principles and parameters version of universal grammar, construed as a theory of the innate mental architecture responsible for the acquisition of some aspects of language. I criticize the critics of UG for failing to distinguish between the various kinds of "errors" that children can make in speech-production, one-off production errors and rule-based production errors, for overgeneralizing from production tasks at the cost of attention to comprehension tasks, for failure to attend to certain aspects of CORPUS data that undermine their critiques of UG, and for making illegitimate charges of "question-begging." I do not mean to endorse UG, but rather merely to show that current criticisms do not undermine it. 


 
&nbsp;


  
     
       CV
      Teaching
      Home
      Personal 
          Information
    
  

&nbsp;