Philosophy Department 2010 Spring Courses 



PHL
120 Practical Reasoning (Dr. Bak)
    Tuesday – Thursday (2C) 11:00 am– 12:15 pm  and (4A)  3:30 –
4:45 pm ( 4A ONLY for Honor Students).    Survey of skills in
critical thinking and
scientific
reasoning, including the ability to identify different kinds of
arguments, recognize common fallacies of reasoning, and evaluate
analogical, causal, and statistical arguments.


PHL
 290 1B Topics in Philosophy: Ethics and Narrative Medicine (Pence) 
Monday, Wed. &amp; Friday 9:00 am – 9:50 pm   Ethics and Narrative
Medicine focuses on    philosophical and ethical issues in writing
about medicine: how to write about cases without violating
confidentiality, the construction of self via  autobiography, the
doctor-patient relationship, the ends of medicine, and how attention
to writing commands attention to reasoning.  Six books will be read,
and students will write (and re-write) six essays. This is an
intensive reading and writing course for students o want to be
challenged.


PHL
 290 2E Topics in Philosophy: Virtue Ethics (Whall)  
Tuesday &amp; Thursday 2:00 pm – 3:15 pm   This course is a survey
of the origin, development and recent revival of Virtue Ethics.
Readings include several chapters from Plato's
Republic, selections
from the ancient Stoics and Alisdair MacIntyre's
After Virtue.
  

PHL
315 4C Ethics:
Good and Evil  (Stephens)
Tuesday &amp; Thursday 7:00 pm–         8:15 pm    Morality;
its, nature, principles, and scope.  Normative and critical 

problems
in moral philosophy; moral obligation.  One previous PHL course or
permission
of the instructor.
 

PHL
 321/EC 490 –2C Cooperation and Competition  (Ross)  Tuesday
&amp; Thursday             11:00 am – 12:15 pm
  This
is an introductory course in game
theory,
the framework for   analyzing strategic interaction. Game theory is
(among other things), the basic technology           for
understanding most phenomena in microeconomics and some phenomena in
macroeconomics, and many processes in political science, law,
evolutionary biology, and the science of animal behavior (ethnology).
In this course we will study the basic structure of the theory. All
mathematics will either be self-contained within the course, or will
be familiar from EC 210 (Principles of Microeconomics). 





PHL
 335-2B Philosophy of Law: (Dr. Benditt )
Tuesday &amp; Thursday 9:30 am – 10:45 am   Topics: theories of the
nature of law (natural law, realism, positivism, critical legal
theory);  theories of   Constitutional interpretation; Constitutional
protections such as freedom of speech  and religion and the right of
privacy;      selected issues in criminal and civil law.  No
prerequisites.  



PHL
341-2D  History of Philosophy: Descartes (Dr. Arnold)
Tuesday -Thursday 12:30 pm – 1:45 pm   This course is about major
figures and developments in philosophy in the 17th and 18th
centuries.  Philosophers to be studied include the Continental
Rationalists (Descartes, Spinoza and Leibniz), the British
Empiricists (Locke, Berkeley, and Hume).  Topics include the nature
and extent of human knowledge, the existence of God, the nature of
the human mind, the relationship between mind, matter, and God, and
the philosophical foundations of modern science.  This is a true
“core” philosophy course.  Even though it is not required, every
philosophy major should take it.  If you like philosophy, you will
like this course.  Grades will be determined by take-home tests and a
book review.


PHL
372 - 2C Minds and Machines (Dr. Abrams) Tuesday–Thursday
11:00 am 

– 12:15
pm   This course focuses
on questions like the following:  Can
computers think?  Is the mind just the brain’s software?  Could
following sophisticated rules produce intelligence?  How could a
machine understand metaphor, analogy, or symbolism?  Would a computer
be smarter if it had emotions?  How can states of a computer or
states of a brain represent, be about,
things outside of the
computer?     We will approach such questions from
the perspectives from philosophy of mind, artificial intelligence,
and cognitive psychology.


PHL
 375 5Q  Philosophy of Mind  (Dr. Stephens)  (Also
PY 375) Tuesday
&amp; Thursday 2:00 pm – 3:15 pm
 Mind; its nature, forms
and functions.  Consciousness, self-consciousness, action, belief,
desire, rationality, personal identity; problems such as mind-body,
psychological explanation and freedom of will.  Prerequisite: One
previous PHL course or permission of instructor.  



PHL
 490/EC 490 4A Neuro
Economics
(Ross) Tuesday &amp;
Thursday  3:30 pm – 4:45 pm.  This course will study the growing
new interdisciplinary research matrix of neuroeconomics, the study of
reward valuation in the brain. Students will learn the basic theory
of neural reward processing, along with fundamental principles of
design and interpretation of experiments based on neuroimaging. The
main part of the course will then be taken up with review of selected
leading research papers from the field’s first decade.
Controversies will be reviewed, and the implications of
neuroeconomics for economics and business studies more broadly
(especially marketing research) will be discussed. 





PHL
  490 –4A God and Free Will  (Price) Tuesday
&amp; Thursday 3:30 pm – 4:45 pm   

In
the past twenty-five years, much important work has been done on the
subjects of God and free will.  This course deals with some of this
work.  It considers such topics as the existence and attributes of
God, the relation of God to time, the Principle of Alternative
Possibilities, and new arguments for libertarianism and
incompatibilism.  The readings include articles and book selections
by some of the best metaphysicians of the period, e.g.,  Alvin
Plantinga, Richard Swinburne, and Peter van Inwagen.


PHL
 491/EC 450 –2E Economics, Institutions and Law  (Ross)   Tuesday
&amp; Thursday 2:00 pm – 3:15 pm
  This
course studies the microeconomic and macroeconomic consequences of
different institutional environments and arrangements of designed
incentives. This includes political, regulatory and legal structures
and rules, both as pertain to actual institutions at the macro level
(e.g., the Federal Reserve, the IMF, the World Bank) and regulated
structures at the micro level (households and firms). Normative
justification of institutional designs is also addressed. Background
in intermediate microeconomics and introductory macroeconomics is
assumed.  Most of the course is based on standard lecture and test
format. However, it concludes with a simulation of an international
institutional reform conference, relying on guided research to be
done by students


PHL
 499 00 Philosophy Seminar: Philosophy of Science and Medicine
(Kincaid/Sullivan)  
This course is a directed readings on philosophy of science issues in
medicine.  We will work on the following kinds of questions:  What is
a disease? Can diseases be understood objectively as independent of
human values?  Are psychiatric conditions diseases?  Are there
theories in medicine like other sciences?  To what extent does
medical knowledge require experimental studies as opposed to
observational ones? What factors influence diagnosis of individual
cases of disease?  Is individual diagnosis inevitably an art rather
than a science?  Regular meetings at mutually agreeable times will be
arranged.   Students should have enough philosophy or other course
work that they feel comfortable pursuing topics independently.